<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The Finnsburg Encounter | Author’s Note</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles/stylesheet.css"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles/page_styles.css"/>
</head>

<body class="page-body">

  <section epub:type="preface" role="doc-preface" aria-labelledby="section_title">

    <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="pageix" aria-label="ix" title="ix"></span>

    <header class="chapter-heading" id="section_title">

      <h2 class="section-name">AUTHOR’S NOTE, 1990</h2>

    </header>

    <main>
	<p class="body">The tale here set forth of Finn and Hildeburh grew out of a small portion of the Old English heroic poem <em>Beowulf</em>. After Beowulf’s victory over the monster Grendel, the hero and his brave companions gather together in Heorot, the famous hall of Danish king Hrothgar, to celebrate. In that portion of the poem, often called “The Finnsburg Episode of Beowulf” (lines 1064–1124), Hrothgar’s poet sings a song about the famous battle of Finn and Hnaef. The tale is retold in brief by the <em>Beowulf</em> poet—a story within a story, as it were. At the time that <em>Beowulf</em> was composed, that tale of Finn and Hildeburh was probably well-known, and so the <em>Beowulf</em> poet needed only to give a brief summary of the events. Now, however, many centuries later, the full story of these events is long lost. All we know of the tragic tale of Finn is what we read in that small episode of <em>Beowulf</em>, and in a cryptic fragment of another poem which was discovered, transcribed by the scholar George Hickes, and then lost, but which seems to relate closely to the events told by the <em>Beowulf</em> poet.</p>
	<p class="body">Here then is given, as recreated in the imagination of the author, a fuller tale of Finn and Hildeburh, and of the events leading up to the fight at Finnsburg. No knowledge of <em>Beowulf</em> is necessary, but those who are familiar with that great poem may enjoy these speculations. In order to give a more realistic, historical flavor to the tale, I have placed the events during a particular period of history, namely the early seventh century. This proved to be a rather troublesome business, for it raised many difficult questions. Are the events of the Finn Episode based on a real battle? Did these people really exist in history? If so, when? <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="pagex" aria-label="x" title="x"></span>We don’t know the answers to these questions. Thus in some sense this time frame is rather arbitrary. Historians, Old English scholars, and archaeologists have argued over the dating of the <em>Beowulf</em> poem for years. Some have dated the poem’s composition as early as 500, and others as late as 1000. The closest one can come to a general consensus would be in the mid-800s, but that is really more of a compromise than a consensus. The tale of Finn, if already well-known by the time <em>Beowulf</em> was composed, must have taken place long before. If <em>Beowulf</em> was composed in 500, then the tale of Finn obviously could not have taken place after 600! My dating of the tale is as much for the sake of convenience as anything; there were some things about that period, such as the founding of Lindisfarne, that I wanted to include in my tale. But there are a few other good reasons for setting my story during that time. It has been suggested that the Hengest of this tale is one and the same as the Hengest who in the late sixth century finally defeated the remnant forces of the Britons under the famed British warleader, King Arthur. But once again, knowledge of these dates and events is not at all necessary to the enjoyment of the tale set forth here, which was written to stand on its own.</p>
	<p class="body">I would give my deepest thanks to Professor Robert Farrell of Cornell University. His expertise in medieval archaeology and Old English language and literature was invaluable to me. In addition to much enthusiastic encouragement, he also provided the critical eye that is so necessary to a novel like this. Considerable thanks are also due to Jan Dennis of Crossway Books for his encouragement and work with me on this project. There is no doubt that without the two of them, this would not have been written.</p>
	<div class="signature">
    <p class="signature">Matthew T. Dickerson</p>
    <p class="signature">August 1990</p>
  </div>
	</main>

  </section>

</body>

</html>