<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">

<head>
  <title>The Finnsburg Encounter | Author’s Note</title>
  <link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/page_styles.css"/>
  <link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/stylesheet.css"/>
</head>

<body class="page-body">

  <section epub:type="preface" role="doc-preface" aria-labelledby="section_title">

    <header class="chapter-heading" id="section_title">

      <h2 class="section-name">AUTHOR’S NOTE, 2021</h2>

    </header>

    <main>
	<p class="body"><span class="bfl">I</span>t is interesting to go back to a novel I wrote more than three decades ago. I have changed as a writer over that time. Over the course of more than a dozen books written and published between then and now, I like to think I have improved in my craft. So it is very tempting to revise my earlier work, polishing and refining the prose of my younger self. Yet I have resisted that temptation. Any attempt at improving the prose, no matter how restrained I sought to be, would undoubtably also make the new version more representative of my current style. Which is to say, it would become a different book even if it remained the same “story”. So despite the strong temptation, the only edits I have made have been to correct one typo that has bothered me since the book was published. (Any other changes or typos likely arose from the process of converting the text to digital form from the scan of a printed version.)</p>
<p class="body">For the truth is, I think the story still holds beauty for me, however many flaws I find in my telling of it. When I wrote it, it held many surprises for me. And I’ve heard from numerous readers who have told me the same thing.</p>
<p class="body">I also grew to care about the characters as I got to know them better—both the literary figures (Folcwalda, Finn, Hildeburh, and Finnlaf) and also those that emerged from my own author’s imagination (especially Willimond, Ulestan, Kristinge, and Daelga). Indeed, I enjoyed getting to know these characters so much, and spending time immersed in the world in which they lived, that I wanted to tell more of their stories, and to get to know them better. I eventually did in the sequel novel <em>The Rood and the Torc: the Song of Kristinge, Son of Finn</em> (Wings Press, 2014).</p>
<p class="body">I hope readers are still able to find delight in these two stories.</p>
	<div class="signature">
    <p class="signature">Matthew T. Dickerson</p>
    <p class="signature">March 2021</p>
  </div>
	</main>

  </section>

</body>

</html>