<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">

<head>
  <title>The Finnsburg Encounter | Chapter VII: Farewells</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/stylesheet.css"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/page_styles.css"/>
</head>

<body class="page-body">

  <section epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" aria-labelledby="chapter_title">

    <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page73" aria-label="73" title="73"></span>

    <header class="chapter-heading" id="chapter_title">

      <p class="chapter-heading_number">VII</p>

      <h2 class="chapter-heading_title" aria-label="Farewells">
        <span aria-hidden="true">F<em>arewells</em></span>
      </h2>

    </header>

    <main role="main" class="body">
	<p class="body">The absence of Finn and Hildeburh did not lessen the enthusiasm of the celebration, which continued unabated late into the night until one by one the warriors sank into unconsciousness. Though most managed to find their way into Hwitstanburg where they collapsed on a bench or beside the hearth at the foot of their chieftain, more than a few spent the night outside on the ground.</p>
	<p class="body">Yet the mead was still plentiful, and the celebration of summer continued the following day and the day after as well. The Danes and Frisians were soon joined by many hale warriors from lands far and wide as numerous ships, proud and full, sailed into Hwitstanwic from across’ the Swan Road. They came bearing kings, princes, chieftains, thanes, earls and warriors alike. By Folcwalda’s invitation they had come to join the celebration and to witness the alliance of Danes and Frisians. Nor did those present lack opportunity to form alliances and treaties with other war leaders and clan chieftains who had also come. For that reason alone, many great chieftains had come or sent their princes and earls. And even those who had no wish or need for new alliances were drawn to the celebration for fear that if they were not present, they might find, in their absence, that their enemies had suddenly allied against them. Folcwalda, in his wisdom and cunning, had preyed upon these very motivations to gather together those powers whom he desired to witness his new bond with Hoc. Each king or prince whom he greeted was let to see very clearly the bench of the Danish king beside that of his own.</p>
	<p class="body">On the first night, Saxon and Swedish princes with their small warbands had arrived from opposite directions at the same <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page74" aria-label="74" title="74"></span>time. Each eager to be first into the village, they had nearly run up the hill. The Saxons and Swedes were followed shortly by a band of English thanes with their young prince, no more than ten summers old. And early the following morning a ship bearing a grey and battle-hardened chieftain of a small Jutish tribe arrived. His battle-axe in hand, he stepped ashore appearing ready at any moment to enter into battle. He had no love for the Swedes, nor for the Danes, who ruled too much Jutish land. Only with great difficulty was he convinced there was no trap waiting to be sprung.</p>
	<p class="body">And so it continued throughout the celebration and for many days afterward. The Frisian guards at Hwitstanwic were kept busy that week. Fortunately for those in the village, the warbands were so concerned about the danger from each other that many of their men were left on the beach to guard their ships. Small camps spread out all along Hwitstanwic.</p>
	<p class="body">The chieftains, however, all found their way to Hwitstan, where they entered the new hall and were greeted warmly by Folcwalda and Hoc, who spent the greater portion of those three days sitting side by side on their new thrones. Neither king partook of the mead cup to any great extent, but neither did they discourage their followers from enjoying its pleasures.</p>
	<p class="body">Folcwalda took special interest in the arrival of Ecgwalda, the ruler of the Half-Franks of Domburg. Ecgwalda’s people were the only remaining Frisians not to accept Folcwalda’s kingship, save for the powerful clan at Wic by Dorestad. (But Lyndlaf, soon to be the chieftain at Dorestad, had already promised his allegiance. It was only a matter of time—months or maybe even days—until his father would die and pass on the crown.) Ecgwalda was the last obstacle to a completely unified Friesland. His small village of Domburg in the southwest was on a long peninsula near the mouth of the Meuse River, not far south of the Rhine. For most of its great length, the Meuse was deep and wide. It flowed into the North Sea from deep in the heart of the continent, making it one of the best trade routes in the north. Many goods destined for or coming from the English, Jutish and Saxon cities passed through Domburg, due east of Cantwara and not far from the narrowest point of crossing—a journey of no more than twenty miles. Thus, though Ecgwalda’s tribe was small, it was strong and wealthy. Furthermore, Domburg was easily defended. <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page75" aria-label="75" title="75"></span>Its position on the end of the peninsula left only one narrow approach by land.</p>
	<p class="body">The village’s main weakness lay in the number of small islands scattered about the bay at the mouth of the Meuse. The islands could act as shelters for invading armies which might hide there, waiting to attack. Landings on most of these isles were fairly easy, leaving Domburg vulnerable to quick raids from the sea. Yet even the islands could be used to Domburg’s advantage if the clan’s chieftain planned well. Small outposts scattered about them would serve to give warning of attacks and could also be used to harry the ships of an invading army. Domburg could be built, by either Folcwalda or his enemies, into more than just the largest of Friesland’s trade centers. It could become a strong city as well. It was vital to the unity of Friesland to gain Ecgwalda’s allegiance, and to do so quickly and without shedding Frisian blood.</p>
	<p class="body">If forced to it, Folcwalda had the military might to conquer Ecgwalda and seize Domburg by force. Many of his thanes had suggested such more than once. In fact, a plan for doing so had been brewing in his mind for over a year. He refrained only because the growing Merovingian kingdom watched his every move closely. A war within Friesland would surely invite raids from the outside; if not from the Merovingians, then from overseas. Furthermore, Folcwalda loathed to shed the blood of his men unless it was necessary. Even so, he knew that failure to add Domburg to the kingdom soon would severely weaken Friesland’s dominance of the best trade routes.</p>
	<p class="body">Ulestan, too, was aware of the importance of Domburg and thus of Ecgwalda. When he saw the chieftain arrive, he made a point of gathering the best of the Frisian knights—those that could be found sober—to stand in the hall beside Folcwalda. Deomaer, from the back of the hall, watched with interest as Ulestan made every effort to display the might of his king to the visiting chieftain from Domburg. He noticed as well the way Ecgwalda looked upon Hoc with fear and respect. The new allegiance with the Danes was having its desired effect—at least upon Ecgwalda. Late on the second day of feasting, Ecgwalda approached Folcwalda and said a few words which only Ulestan and Hoc were close enough to hear. Folcwalda rose to his feet, and the two stared at each other for a few moments and then <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page76" aria-label="76" title="76"></span>smiled as they extended hands and grasped each other by the wrists. Whatever had transpired bode well for Friesland. Ulestan disappeared shortly after that, satisfied that his efforts had succeeded.</p>
	<p class="body">Deomaer left the hall as well. He wandered around the village enjoying the festivities and the great feast provided by his king. The jeweler also took advantage of the many merchants who seemed to have appeared out of nowhere. Thinking ahead to the winter months, he bought himself a new fur-lined robe. The pouch of gold coins which had been given him by Folcwalda and which now hung at his side gave him a certain power he had never before experienced. It also made him the focus of attention of any merchants who happened to discover his new wealth. Though this was at first a boon, it soon became a nuisance. Before long, Deomaer found himself seeking less visible places from which to enjoy the celebration and avoid the merchants. It was only then that he began to notice the frequent disruptions around the village. Princes and their thanes, full of mead, would bump into their counterparts from other tribes and kingdoms, and tempers would flash as if the small collision of two bodies was enough to begin a war—and perhaps it was; Deomaer did not know. At other times seamen would come to blows arguing over the purchase of a piece of cloth or the last pair of leather sandals.</p>
	<p class="body">But each and every time there was an outbreak of tempers, just as the situation was about to veer out of control, Ulestan would appear out of nowhere and the disruption would cease as quickly as it had erupted. Or if it wasn’t Ulestan, it was Aelfer or Beow, both of whom the jeweler frequently saw conferring with the elder thane. And as Deomaer watched more closely, he saw something else as well—something which disturbed him greatly. Each time there was a particularly hostile or violent incident, there would be Hunlaf, Oslaf or Guthlaf quietly slipping away from the scene like dogs caught stealing meat. Deomaer wondered if Ulestan saw them too. But he said nothing, for it was not the place of a jeweler to involve himself in the making of treaties or the governing of people. Nonetheless, he shuddered to think what the days would have been like had not Ulestan been at hand and had he not had the wisdom to require all of the arriving bands to leave their weapons in their ships or with their horses in camps outside the village. But Ulestan was there, and the <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page77" aria-label="77" title="77"></span>situation never did get out of hand, and Deomaer was able to sleep in peace those nights—or at least in as much peace as could be expected in the midst of such a big celebration in such a small village.</p>
	<p class="body">When Finn and Hildeburh emerged sheepishly from their hut near midday on the third day of feasting, Hwitstan was in shambles. Drunk warriors lay scattered at odd angles all across the village; wine and mead cups lay broken and spilled across the grounds; there were more than a few bruised and bloody warriors—victims of overenthusiasm in some of the rougher sporting events; and on the south side of the village ashes still smouldered from a fire which had consumed one hut in the middle of the second night. Surprisingly enough, however, there had not been any fatalities, and there were still enough sober villagers and warriors, both Frisian and alien, to raise a loud cheer for the new couple as they emerged.</p>
	<p class="body">“Long live Finn,” the Frisians shouted. “Long live Hildeburh,” echoed the Danes.</p>
	<p class="body">“Long live Finn and Hildeburh! Long live Finn and Hildeburh!” everybody joined in.</p>
	<p class="body">All arms were raised in salute as the two walked through the clearing and entered the great hall. Hoc and Folcwalda sat watching as if they had been expecting them.</p>
	<p class="body">“You return so soon?” Folcwalda asked in jest.</p>
	<p class="body">Both Finn and Hildeburh blushed. “The feasting is over,” Finn replied.</p>
	<p class="body">“You look well, my daughter,” Hoc said with a smile.</p>
	<p class="body">“I am well, Father. More well than I have ever been.”</p>
	<p class="body">“Would that I could say the same about all my men,” Folcwalda laughed.</p>
	<p class="body">“And I,” Hoc said. “This could be the longest sea voyage any of them have ever taken. I fear the ground is already swaying beneath them.”</p>
	<p class="body">“Perhaps you should remain with us for another week,” Folcwalda suggested. Hildeburh gazed at her father and asked the same question with her eyes.</p>
	<p class="body">“Another day perhaps.” Hoc smiled back at his daughter. “But not another week. I’m afraid that the new blood bond between our kingdoms might quickly be broken if our men are together much longer.”</p>
	<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page78" aria-label="78" title="78"></span>
	<p class="body">“Is that a prophecy?” Hnaef laughed. With his thane Hengest he had stepped up behind his sister and now kissed her on the cheek.</p>
	<p class="body">Folcwalda glared. For the first time in three days the smile dropped from his expression. Hnaef didn’t notice. He kept smiling at his sister and new brother.</p>
	<p class="body">“Not as long as we rule our people,” Finn replied, returning his smile and extending his arm at the same time.</p>
	<p class="body">They grasped each other firmly by the wrists. “Not as long as we rule our people,” Hnaef echoed.</p>
	<p class="body">“Then let us share the mead cup and drink to peace. I have grown thirsty, and I’m afraid I’ve missed the best of the celebration.”</p>
	<p class="body">“No,” Hnaef laughed. “We’ve missed the best of the celebration. But we did the best we could. There might not be any mead left.”</p>
	<p class="body">“No mead? For the prince and his bride?”</p>
	<p class="body">“You underestimate your father,” Hoc said. “If I know him at all, the best of the mead still remains. Am I right?” the Dane asked, turning to the Frisian.</p>
	<p class="body">“You know me too well, my friend.” Folcwalda smiled. He raised his hand and gestured to a servant, who returned a moment later with a companion. They were carrying six full cups. A small amount of remaining mead was quickly passed around the hall, and some to the village as well.</p>
	<p class="body">The two kings rose and stood facing the two princes and the bride.</p>
	<p class="body">“We drink to peace between our people,” Folcwalda said.</p>
	<p class="body">“We drink to the happiness of the daughter of the Danes,” Hoc added.</p>
	<p class="body">“We drink to the bond of blood,” Finn said. Whether he was referring to the bond between himself and Hildeburh or between the Frisians and the Danes, nobody knew and nobody asked.</p>
	<p class="body">“We drink to many trips across the sea,” Hnaef finished.</p>
	<p class="body">“In both directions,” Hengest added.</p>
	<p class="body">Tears came to Hildeburh’s eyes, but she said nothing. Six cups were lifted and drained. Throughout the hall and in the village every hand which held a cup, save for three, was lifted in salute, and every cup which still held mead, save for three, was drained. Only Guthlaf, Oslaf and Hunlaf refrained from drinking, <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page79" aria-label="79" title="79"></span>though each held a full cup. Deomaer alone noticed the three cups which tipped slightly to pour a few drops onto the Frisian soil.</p>
	
	<p class="separator">•</p>
	
	<p class="body">Summer’s Day celebration was over.</p>
	<p class="body">In the end, King Hoc remained more than one day. In fact, he remained another ten as his ships were repaired and his stores resupplied. The work probably could have been done in two or three days, but the king was intent on conversations with Folcwalda. Most of these talks concerned the Merovingians and their king, Chlotar the Younger—or Chlotar Kinslayer as he was called by Folcwalda. But they also spoke of trade rights, customs, and harboring rights for Danish ships. Many agreements were sealed with drink. During that time Finn also had to deal with Réadban as he had promised. But when the Danes had arrived, Réadban had lost heart. He knew his plan had failed, and he was all too eager to receive Finn’s mercy when it was offered. He swore fealty to Folcwalda and Finn and promised tribute to the high kingship.</p>
	<p class="body">When Hoc finally left, many more tears were shed—as many by the departing king and prince as by the Danish princess who was left behind. Finn and Hildeburh remained atop the tower long after the Danish ships were out of sight, and then, shortly after the sun disappeared, they slowly walked back to Hwitstan, hand in hand, and entered their new home.</p>
	<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page80" aria-label="80" title="80"></span>
	</main>

  </section>

</body>

</html>