<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">

<head>
  <title>The Finnsburg Encounter | Chapter IV: Waiting’s End</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles/stylesheet.css"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles/page_styles.css"/>
</head>

<body class="page-body">

  <section epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" aria-labelledby="chapter_title">

    <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page43" aria-label="43" title="43"></span>

    <header class="chapter-heading" id="chapter_title">

      <p class="chapter-heading_number">IV</p>

      <h2 class="chapter-heading_title" aria-label="Waiting's End">
        <span aria-hidden="true">W<em>aiting’s </em>E<em>nd</em></span>
      </h2>

    </header>

    <main role="main" class="body">
	<p class="body">“Finn!”</p>
	<p class="body">A loud voice caught Deomaer’s attention. He turned around to see from whom it had come. Behind him stood a young man, richly dressed in the battle-dress of a Frisian lord. He was a chieftain, or perhaps a chieftain’s son. Deomaer had not seen him before, but if his attire and voice did not deceive, he was no stranger to Friesland. Though no thane of Folcwalda’s, he had Frisian blood within him. In his hand he held a naked blade, glinting in the sun. His shield was across his shoulder, ready at any moment to be taken in hand. Upon his head was a battle helm.</p>
	<p class="body">Behind him to the west, at the edge of the trees upon the crest of the hill, was a small warband, perhaps twenty-five men, all mounted. From whence had they come? Deomaer had neither seen nor heard them arrive.</p>
	<p class="body">“Finn, I challenge you!” the voice cried out.</p>
	<p class="body">Deomaer stepped backward away from the man. Had he heard the stranger correctly? Who was this who so boldly challenged the prince?</p>
	<p class="body">Finn made no reply.</p>
	<p class="body">“Finn, son of Folcwalda, I challenge you again. If you are not a coward, turn and speak to me.”</p>
	<p class="body">For the first time that day Finn’s eyes left the horizon. From atop the tall tower of stone, he turned and looked down upon the challenger. His eyes were firm and hard. He shifted his grip on his ash staff and held it with two hands. It was no meager weapon in the strong grip of a warrior. An ash staff could smash skulls as well as swords could split them.</p>
	<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page44" aria-label="44" title="44"></span>
	<p class="body">“Speak your name, bold intruder,” the prince said in a firm voice.</p>
	<p class="body">“You know well who I am,” he replied.</p>
	<p class="body">“Well I do,” Finn answered, “but that all my people may know the name of him who challenges their prince, I charge you now to make yourself known.”</p>
	<p class="body">“Very well,” the intruder replied. “I am Réadban, son of Ramlaf. And I speak not to you alone, but to all of your people. Let them hear me if they will. We have waited long enough, and for nothing.”</p>
	<p class="body">To Deomaer’s great surprise, there actually arose some murmur of assent. Some felt they had been kept waiting all too long for the feast and celebration.</p>
	<p class="body">“You make us wait in vain for your proud lies. There will be no marriage,” Réadban continued. “Nor will there be a High King’s torc for your neck. No claim does the tribe of Folcwalda have upon the throne of Friesland.”</p>
	<p class="body">“Do you have greater claim?” Finn asked, his voice lowering dangerously. His hard eyes narrowed, and the grip upon his staff tightened. “If you do, then make it now.”</p>
	<p class="body">“No claim does anyone have to rule our clan save our chieftain alone,” the proud stranger answered. “We make no claim to rule over you, but we will have no High King for ourselves.”</p>
	<p class="body">“So you may choose. But it remains still to be seen.”</p>
	<p class="body">“No! It is not still to be seen. We have waited long enough. We wait no longer. You promise the support of Danish spears, but we see them not. And when we do, they will likely be piercing our shields.” At these words a number of Finn’s folk nodded. Many had feared the dreaded Danes for some time and had no desire to see them in their own village. Réadban was wisely playing on the villagers’ fears as well as their impatience, seeking to gain their support. “If you will make claim, then make it now by facing my sword. He is a coward who trusts in the spears of others. Prove your worth with your own sword! Will you face me alone, or need I call upon my warband to bring you down from your feeble tower?”</p>
	<p class="body">Haughty words Réadban spoke, seeking to anger Finn into accepting his challenge. For many days he had watched and waited in hiding, hoping that the Danes would not arrive and that he would have opportunity of carrying out his plans. Many <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page45" aria-label="45" title="45"></span>secret ambitions he harbored in his heart. Despite his words, he hoped one day to have the Frisian throne himself. He knew well that if the Danes arrived and Finn and Hildeburh were wed, he himself would have little hope of ever opposing them. And in truth, though he told the waiting people to the contrary, he suspected that the Danes would indeed come, and soon. That was why he was acting now and taking his chance. If Finn was dead, there could be no marriage. Even if afterwards Réadban had to flee for his life to escape the vengeance of Finn’s kin, he would survive and return to power later. All the better if Friesland was in turmoil and had no prince. But he needed to provoke Finn to a fight if his plan was to succeed. Further, he needed to defeat him.</p>
	<p class="body">“Fool,” Finn spoke, “you contradict yourself even as you speak. You say that my promises are false and the Danes will not come, and then you warn us that the Danes will come and will be our enemies. You cannot have both! And you are twice a fool if you think to threaten me with your warband.” In one swift move he pulled his horn to his lips, and Réadban stepped back suddenly as if the ivory were a strung bow. But Finn did not wind it. “If this horn were sounded, in but little more time than it would take me to kill you, the warband of Folcwalda would be upon this hill and not one of your men would ride from Hwitstan alive. If a single man takes but one step closer, none shall live to see tomorrow.”</p>
	<p class="body">“Are you a coward then?” Réadban shouted. But he knew at once that his plan was falling. He knew Finn was right. If he could not anger the prince, then he could not defeat him. And his warband could not fight against Folcwalda’s. Even now, men in the village were looking up at them and wondering. Some were picking up their spears and swords. He shouted again in desperation, “Come down. I challenge you again. Come and prove your own sword.” But with his neck craned up to see Finn, he felt much less threatening than he would have liked.</p>
	<p class="body">“Your challenge I will accept,” Finn answered clearly and without hesitation.</p>
	<p class="body">Réadban’s face revealed his surprise at the prince’s response. And then it showed his fear. For as much as he had hoped that his plan to provoke Finn would succeed, he hoped also that it would fail. He had seen Finn wield a sword and was afraid to meet <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page46" aria-label="46" title="46"></span>him in battle. Had he truly thought his plan would succeed, he might have been less willing to try.</p>
	<p class="body">But Réadban’s surprise and fear were the next moment replaced with rage when Finn continued, “If you persist in being a fool, I will accept your challenge, but you will wait until your head has cooled. Seven days hence you may appear before me and face my sword if you will. Then shall nobody stand between us. This day I will raise no weapon, for it is the day of my wedding.”</p>
	<p class="body">“Seven days I will not wait,” Réadban began to reply, but Finn interrupted him.</p>
	<p class="body">“Seven days you will wait. For when you see the Danes arrive according to my word, you may yet repent of your accusations. On that day you may bow and swear fealty to the king, or face judgment for the offense given me this day. For I account the offense of your insults to be great! Until that day I will hear no more. But in this I warn you: move not one man from where they stand or you shall all be struck down and your bodies sent to the pit!”</p>
	<p class="body">So fiercely spoken were Finn’s words that his challenger stepped back as if struck. He glared angrily up at the prince, but either he could think of nothing to say or he thought better of saying it. A long silence followed in which neither Finn nor Réadban spoke. Réadban stood seething, but did not move. Those around watched in stunned amazement at what had taken place. Very slowly Finn turned back to face the sea. His people followed his example, each making a conscious effort not to look at Réadban, though all were curious what he would do next. The angered young chieftain lowered his sword to the ground and fumed, but he made to move either to leave or to call his war band. He joined those waiting, hoping furiously that the Danes would not come and that Finn would be humbled.</p>
	<p class="body">Moments later the clear tone of Finn’s ivory horn sounded forth from the top of the hill and was heard for the first time in Friesland: a long, beautifully clear sound ringing from the tower overhead. In later years the mighty horn of Finn would be heard many times, bringing joy to the ears of his followers and fear to his enemies. But now it brought fear to Deomaer, for the moment he heard it and realized what it was he thought the worst—that Réadban’s warband was sweeping down upon the unarmed villagers <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page47" aria-label="47" title="47"></span>and Finn was signaling for help. Little did it matter that Folcwalda would soon be there to avenge them. Deomaer would be dead within seconds. But when he turned to look, neither Réadban nor his warband had moved. Then why had the horn been winded?</p>
	<p class="body">There could be only one other reason: the Danish ship had been sighted.</p>
	<p class="body">Before Finn’s horn had finished ringing, Folcwalda appeared from out of Hwitstanburg followed by his thanes. His long strides carried him quickly up the hill, and in a few short moments he was standing beside the tower atop the hill with his thanes beside him. Ulestan stood on his right and the brothers Eormen and Edmen on his left. They were flanked closely by Aelfer, Beow, Froda and Hereric the Geat. Some others stood beside these on both sides or followed at a little distance. There were twenty thanes in all; twenty-two mighty Frisians, each with their own warbands and retinue. They were a fearsome band, armed and war ready, veterans all of many battles. And as mighty as his thanes appeared, Folcwalda was greater than all, both in strength and stature. Seeing him, it was clear how Folcwalda had been so quickly accepted as king. His kingship was visible in him. He was a chieftain among chieftains! And Finn also.</p>
	<p class="body">At their appearance, Réadban’s followers, who until then had remained astride their horses, dismounted and backed away nervously. Folcwalda glanced briefly at them once, and then longer at Réadban, but said nothing.</p>
	<p class="body">In the bright sun of the later afternoon Folcwalda, with his brazen boar’s-head helm and his bare sword which dangled at his side, glittered as much as the sea before him. His blade was chipped, scraped and scratched in a dozen places. And as badly battle-scarred as his sword was, the boar’s-head helmet was worse! What those blows which had so dented that metal would have done to Folcwalda’s head had he not been wearing the helmet, none would desire to guess. The king’s arms too were bare and as covered with scars as the blade which they held. Both hands were missing parts of fingers. Many who saw him were amazed that so many scars could appear on a man who was still alive. But the dents on the helmet and sword were testimony to the blows which had missed him.</p>
	<p class="body">Then Finn strode forth from the tower to stand at the side <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page48" aria-label="48" title="48"></span>of his father. He appeared quite in contrast to Folcwalda. His sword was wrapped tightly in leather and was still draped over his back. He wore no helmet upon his head, but his hair flowed freely down over his neck and shoulders. Rather than a leather breast plate as his father wore, he had his red, sleeveless tunic with green patches on the shoulders and a blue silk belt. Only the covered sword gave hint to the warrior that Finn was. But even unarmed he looked nearly as formidable as his father. Surely these two would daunt the mightiest of warriors. Even the Danes would have to respect twenty-two Frisians such as those collected here!</p>
	<p class="body">Deomaer the jeweler looked again at the thanes collected behind the king. Eormen and Edmen, the strong and impetuous duo, had been the first to stand beside Folcwalda in his early days. These brothers were rash and adventurous, but loyal to the bone. They were hardy in battle, so Deomaer was told. In their youth they had acquired much fame and many enemies. Aelfer and his cousin Beow were the quiet ones. They carried spears—an idea they had borrowed from the Danes—and Roman short swords rather than the traditional broadswords of the Frisians. Froda was the youngest of Folcwalda’s thanes, and but a little older than Finn. He was no chieftain himself, but a cousin of Lynd, the chieftain of a large clan in the far southwest. Only five men and six horses were counted in his warband. Nonetheless, though he was not as powerful as the others and commanded no large host, Froda was a good friend of Finn and would likely prove to be his strongest supporter when the time came for the passing of the kingship. The two had traveled much together. Froda had only recently returned from wars in the east between the Geats and Swedes, where he had won much glory and was given noble gifts. To Folcwalda in turn he gave those gifts, including four tall war horses, pledging his allegiance once again with humble words to his king. He was a good thane who sought not for his independence.</p>
	<p class="body">Hereric the Geat was the enigma of Folcwalda’s hearthwerod. He had pledged himself to Folcwalda only two years ago after fleeing the land of the Geats for a reason none but he him self knew. Some rumored that he was a descendant of the evil Heremod the Dane. Heremod had sought refuge among the Jutes many years ago after slaying his own kinsmen. The Jutes had not <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page49" aria-label="49" title="49"></span>only refused his request for refuge, but had killed him and sent his body back to the Danes. That was little more than rumor now, a tale told by poets around the mead benches. If there was any resemblance between Hereric and Heremod, nobody was alive to know. To Deomaer, Hereric didn’t seem like a kinslayer. He was calm and quiet, almost meek. He never spoke of fighting, nor did he even take place in the wild boar hunts. He carried himself about Hwitstan with great humility for one so close to the king. Only in battle did he show himself to be bold. Yet battle was something rarely seen in Friesland, aside from occasional small skirmishes and raids along the southwestern and eastern borders. Most of Folcwalda’s thanes who had seen battle had seen it else where.</p>
	<p class="body">Of all Folcwalda’s thanes, Ulestan the Wise was the most honored. He bore the family emblem of an owl on his shield and helm, and was called “The Owl” because of his great wisdom. The king knew and trusted that wisdom. It was rare to see Folcwalda anywhere without Ulestan at his right side. The two were like brothers. In his youth Ulestan had married Folcwalda’s younger sister Fealla. A year later she had miscarried and died. Though their time together was short, Ulestan’s love for Fealla had been so great that he had never taken another wife for himself, though Folcwalda’s other sister Ingwa had been offered to him. Deomaer knew nothing of Ulestan’s kinship, but he knew it to be noble since both Fealla and Ingwa had been offered to him.</p>
	<p class="body">Ulestan, Aelfer, Eormen, Edmen, Beow, Froda and Hereric stood with Folcwalda now—the closest and most trusted of Folcwalda’s thanes. Following these thanes up the hill were many of their retinue, the members of their warbands. Last came Daelga the poet. His jubilant laughter could be heard by all as he ascended the hill. As eager was he to witness great events as to sing of them. In his lifetime he had already seen much and would bear witness to much more—tales both of joy and of sorrow.</p>
	<p class="body">“Eormen,” Folcwalda said when the Danish ship had come into full view and moved toward the landing.</p>
	<p class="body">“Yes, lord,” the thane answered with a slight bow and bend of his knee.</p>
	<p class="body">“Extend to our guests the hospitality of this land. See that they are treated well.”</p>
	<p class="body">“Your wish,” he responded with a smile and a nod.</p>
	<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page50" aria-label="50" title="50"></span>
	<p class="body">“Ulestan,” Folcwalda continued, the edges of his lip curling slightly in a concealed smile as he did so, “accompany Eormen to see that he doesn’t start a war with our future allies.”</p>
	<p class="body">Eormen’s answering smile was unconcealed. “You underestimate me, Lord Folcwalda. There are too few of them. I would wait until we were outnumbered by fifty or two fifties before I tried to begin a war.”</p>
	<p class="body">Folcwalda laughed. His thane was probably not very far from the truth. “Yes, you are quite right. Nonetheless, Ulestan will accompany you and see that our guests receive a proper welcome.”</p>
	<p class="body">Ulestan nodded, and the two proceeded down the slope to the beach followed by ten other armed warriors who stood close by. The children had all retreated back to the village long before Finn’s horn sounded, and the beach was almost empty when the Danish ship began to ride the low surf up to the sand.</p>
	<p class="body">“Aelfer and Edmen …”</p>
	<p class="body">“Yes,” they responded in unison.</p>
	<p class="body">“Remain with Finn. The rest of us will return to the hall.” “My lord?” Finn asked in surprise.</p>
	<p class="body">“It is fitting for a king to greet his guests from his hall,” Folcwalda answered. “You may remain here to greet your future bride and escort the Danes to the hall which will someday be yours.” He looked his son squarely in the eyes as he continued, “Bear yourself with pride today, Prince of Friesland. This marks the beginning of a great kingdom which will soon be yours.”</p>
	<p class="body">“Not too soon,” Finn said smiling in return. Then he turned to watch the incoming ship. “What have we here?” he suddenly exclaimed.</p>
	<p class="body">Folcwalda turned and gazed upon the beach to see what had caught his son’s attention. A second and third Danish ship had just come around the point and were now rowing into the cove. “Two more Danish ships?” Finn asked rhetorically. “They must have sixty warriors with them. Is this a wedding or an attack?”</p>
	<p class="body">A brief look of surprise and perhaps even doubt crossed Folcwalda’s visage. It remained there only a second, and then the look of resolute calm which was much more familiar was restored. “Froda, Hereric and Beow,” he commanded, “join Ulestan and Eormen on the beach. The rest of you return with <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page51" aria-label="51" title="51"></span>me to the hall where we will greet our honored guests as a king should.” He turned and began down the hill back toward Hwitstanburg. As if nothing more than a parting thought, he added to Finn, “You have your horn should you for any reason need me.” Then he disappeared over the crest, followed by the few thanes not assigned to other tasks.</p>
	<p class="body">Finn turned again to face the Danes. The first ship had slid neatly onto the beach. There was a brief interchange between Ulestan and one of the Danes as they stepped forth. Deomaer did not know for sure who they were, but his guess was verified a second later as he overheard Finn talking to Edmen and Aelfer. “That is Hnaef, son of Hoc, a good prince … and Hengest, his loyal thane, after him. Oslaf the Jute follows next. Though he is no Dane, he holds some kinship with Hnaef. For more than a lifetime Jutland and his folk have been ruled by the Danes. There is some enmity between Jutish and Danish blood. I do not recognize the two who follow Oslaf, but they bear the same shield boss and helm. I would guess them to be Oslaf’s brothers—Guthlaf the elder and Hunlaf the younger.”</p>
	<p class="body">Then Finn’s voice faded in the wind, and Deomaer couldn’t hear what was said next. Two more armed Danes stepped from the ship and were followed immediately by an older Dane who, from his stature and bearing and from the way he was treated by both Ulestan and the other Danes, could only have been Hoc himself. Hoc was tall and broad, old, wise, proud; a king if Deomaer had ever seen one. He alone of all the Danes, save his daughter, wore no helmet. His white hair flowed out in a single braid reaching halfway down his back. If his appearance from afar was not utterly deceiving, he was taller even than Finn or Folcwalda. He towered even over his own son Hnaef. Stepping from the ship, he reached behind him and, to the joy of Finn, offered his hand to a waiting Hildeburh, who rose from her seat and stepped onto Frisian soil for the first time.</p>
	<p class="body">Deomaer could almost feel the ground shake from the great leap which Finn’s heart took as his future bride stepped ashore. Her beauty was no less than Finn himself had described it. She was certainly a treasure. For the first time Deomaer doubted the worth of the gifts he had made for her. As she ascended the hill to the waiting Finn, her beauty seemed to grow with each step. Deomaer stood transfixed by her eyes, as did Edmen and Aelfer. <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page52" aria-label="52" title="52"></span>Only Finn was able to step forth. It was to him that her loving gaze was directed. Even as Finn moved to greet her, Hoc and Hnaef stepped ahead of her and intercepted him.</p>
	<p class="body">“Peace, Finn,” the Danish king said, raising his hand in greeting.</p>
	<p class="body">“Welcome, Hoc, king of the Danes,” Finn replied, pulling his gaze off his beloved only with great difficulty. “Your presence honors us and is much awaited.” He avoided the temptation to look past the king at his daughter, though he knew her eyes were on him.</p>
	<p class="body">“We welcome you also, Hnaef, son of Hoc,” Finn continued, addressing the other prince. He extended his hand, and they grasped each other by the wrists.</p>
	<p class="body">“It has been long,” Hnaef replied.</p>
	<p class="body">“Too long,” Finn said, smiling.</p>
	<p class="body">“Where is Folcwalda?” Hoc asked.</p>
	<p class="body">“He awaits you in his hall,” Finn answered. He wondered how they would respond to Hwitstanburg.</p>
	<p class="body">“Friesland is graced with a new hall?” came a voice from behind Hnaef. It was the one Finn had identified as Oslaf. From this close Deomaer had a much better view of him. He was about the same height as Deomaer, but broader and sturdier. He held a single spear in his right hand, and his left was hooked on a small purse hanging at his side. From head to foot he was decorated with silk. A red silk band was wrapped around each arm and another around his waist. A purple silk ribbon hung from his spear, and another was braided in his hair. There was even green silk on his leggings. How proud he must be, Deomaer thought, that he wears more silk than his king. Hoc wore only a single, thin strand of the precious material around the bottom of his braid. Oslaf’s brothers Hunlaf and Guthlaf were dressed in fashion similar to Oslaf. “And will there be treasure-giving at this hall?” Oslaf asked. Deomaer thought there was a great deal of arrogance in his voice. Perhaps Hnaef thought so as well because he quickly motioned Oslaf to silence.</p>
	<p class="body">Finn said nothing for some time, apparently wondering whether he should answer Oslaf or address only the king and the prince. He kept his eyes fixed’ on Hoc. When neither he nor Hnaef said anything, Finn chose to answer Oslaf. “As you shall soon see, Folcwalda is a generous king. Rings are given freely in <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page53" aria-label="53" title="53"></span>Hwitstan.” As he said this, he glanced past Oslaf down to the beach. The two other Danish ships had pulled ashore, and there seemed to be some trouble between the Danes and the Frisian guards. “Ulestan, see to welcoming the rest of the Danes,” Finn said, nodding toward the beach.</p>
	<p class="body">Ulestan had already noticed the situation and was whispering something in Eormen’s ear. “Yes, lord,” he replied. “l will provide shelter for them in the outlying homes and see that their ships and weapons are well looked after while they are our guests.”</p>
	<p class="body">“Wisely done,” Finn said catching the meaning behind Ulestan’s words. He turned back to address Hoc, and his glance once again caught Hildeburh’s. They held one another’s gaze for a brief moment, and then Finn motioned to Hoc and Hnaef. “The day is late, and the pigs are on the spit. This is Summer’s Day. Mead and beer flow freely. Come and enjoy the hospitality of Hwitstan and all of Friesland.”</p>
	<p class="body">“We are honored,” Hoc replied and motioned to his own thanes to follow him.</p>
	<p class="body">Deomaer watched as Finn, Hoc, Hnaef and Hildeburh started down the hill toward the hall at Hwitstan. Aelfer and Edmen followed closely behind Finn. Hengest remained close behind Hnaef. Guthlaf, Oslaf and Hunlaf followed at a distance and talked quietly among themselves, occasionally pointing toward something they saw off to one side or another. The jeweler then turned back toward the beach. The turmoil seemed to have subsided as soon as Ulestan arrived, and he and Eormen were now leading a small company of Danes up the hill. The remainder of the Danes, some thirty or so men, stayed with the Danish ships under the watchful eye of the ten Frisian guards who remained behind.</p>
	<p class="body">Deomaer walked briskly and entered the hall only a few paces behind the last of the Danes. Most of the village was gathered outside, wandering about and trying to look busy while hoping to catch a glimpse of what was taking place inside. To them this hall was the symbol of the new importance of Hwitstan. When work on the hall had begun, the village had suddenly grown to almost three times its normal size. This growth could only be attributed to the hall, they thought. And from the moment it had been completed, chieftains and thanes from <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page54" aria-label="54" title="54"></span>across Friesland had not ceased entering and leaving its doors. And now the Danish king himself, a giant in their eyes, had entered the hall. Imaginations ran wild with pictures of kings conjuring spirits and casting spells or performing elaborate rituals; or of fights to the death between the Frisians and Danes over the treasures given by the two kings. The truth, Deomaer knew, would be much more mundane. He already had a good guess what would happen: there would a be a rather long ceremonial greeting followed by some giving of gifts—mostly gold and silver rings and pendants crafted by Deomaer himself. If Folcwalda were gathered with his own thanes only, the gifts would have included ancient and proven swords, spears, and all forms of war gear. But these gifts of time-honored weapons would not be likely today. It would be foolish to give a trusted sword to someone who might someday use it against you. Following the gift giving, there would probably be a more private interchange between the kings and princes. Then the wedding and Summer’s Day celebration would begin.</p>
	<p class="body">Despite the villagers’ imaginations of the glories of a mighty king inside his hall, in the best of times a hall was more of a home—a place for shared story and drink, for friendship and comradeship among the loyal followers of a chieftain—than it was a place where great plans were laid and daring challenges issued. It was true that in times of war a king would gather his thanes in a hall and fill them with brave words of noble deeds, would speak of life and death, of fear and courage. But a hall was also the place where warriors would return after a war to find peace—a warm fire, a mug of mead and fellowship—the things most worth going to war for and the things which made returning most worthwhile. The mystery surrounding a hall added to the awe the villagers had of those who entered, but little of that mystery was grounded in truth.</p>
	<p class="body">Nonetheless, as Deomaer strode past the villagers he felt a certain pride that he was among those who were allowed to enter. Inside were gathered the Danes and those whom Deomaer called the “important” Frisians: the thanes and retainers of Finn and Folcwalda and a few others, such as Deomaer himself and the poet Daelga—those who had some special position of honor within the village. Deomaer wasn’t sure if he had been given a place within the hall because of his work as jeweler and moneyer <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page55" aria-label="55" title="55"></span>or because of his common, though distant, ancestry with the king. He hoped it was because of his work.</p>
	<p class="body">“Warriors all, save us alone,” Daelga whispered in his ear, catching him by surprise and making him jump. “Common men we, with kings to dine.” Before Deomaer could respond, the poet was gone. Was his awe that visible as he looked around him? Or was Daelga, too, able to read his thoughts?</p>
	<p class="body">The jeweler slid onto a bench near the door and watched as Hoc approached Folcwalda’s bench. He had appeared merely tall while standing outside. Inside the hall he was a veritable giant. Some of Folcwalda’s mightiest armed men looked puny in comparison. On one side of Hoc walked the smaller Hnaef, still a large man by any measure. On Hoe’s other side came Hildeburh, holding firmly to his extended arm. Her face revealed her timidity and modesty, but there was no fear in her expression. Hengest, Oslaf, Guthlaf and Hunlaf walked a few paces behind their king, and the rest of the Danes dispersed into the hall in groups of three or four, making room for themselves among the Frisians. Hoc held everyone’s attention. As he approached Folcwalda’s throne, the Frisian king rose to greet him. ,</p>
	<p class="body">“Hail Hoc, son of Heart, descendant of the gods. Welcome to Hwitstan and Friesland. May your journey have started in peace, and may it end in peace. Hail Hnaef, son of Hoc. May your name one day be as honored as your father’s, and may your hand be as generous. Hail Hildeburh. May your name be forever praised among the Frisians as was your mother’s among the Danes. May you be a fruitful vine,” he continued with a wink, “growing in fertile soil. Welcome to our family.”</p>
	<p class="body">So saying, Folcwalda extended his arm in greeting. His bearing was strong and confident. For some reason Hoe’s stature did not dominate Folcwalda’s as it had the others’. Though the Danish king was taller even than Folcwalda, something about the Frisian king—his manner perhaps, or his strength, or the way he held his arms or shoulders, or simply his air of confidence enabled him to stand undaunted beside the giant of a Danish king. They stood as equals. Deomaer found this very reassuring. He was intimidated by the Danes, but Folcwalda’s bearing and manner gave him courage. A good king inspired hope in the hearts of his people.</p>
	<p class="body">During this greeting, Finn had stepped to the side of his <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page56" aria-label="56" title="56"></span>father. His gaze was now freely fixed upon Hildeburh, and she returned it openly.</p>
	<p class="body">“Greetings, Folcwalda, son of Folgar,” Hoc replied. “May your kingdom last forever. Your welcome does us great honor. May we return that welcome in our halls. Peace to you and your hall. May we leave with the same peace that we brought.”</p>
	<p class="body">Folcwalda bowed his head slightly and removed from his neck a magnificent gold torc decorated with garnets and surrounded by a twisting silver wire. Deomaer beamed with pride at his own workmanship as his king placed the gift in the hands of Hoc. “May this always be light upon your neck, and may the head that wears it never be cloven.”</p>
	<p class="body">“May the hands of the giver be as blessed as those of him who received,” Hoc returned, bending the torc around his own neck.</p>
	<p class="body">Then Finn stepped forward and approached Hnaef. “May your reign be as mighty and long-lasting as your father’s.” He removed the golden boar’s head from the top of his staff and presented it to the prince. “May your staff never break,” he concluded.</p>
	<p class="body">Hnaef likewise clasped the hand of Finn. “May our nations as well as their princes be as brothers, and may your staff once again suffer from the weight of too much gold.”</p>
	<p class="body">Then Oslaf coughed rather loudly and took a slight step forward. Deomaer noticed that both he and his brothers had their hands resting lightly on the hilts of their swords. <em>Are they expecting gifts as well?</em> he wondered. At the same time that Oslaf was seeking attention, Ulestan entered the hall leading a large group of Danes from the second and third ships. The Danes proceeded to disperse into the hall. There was no small bit of elbowing and pushing as they made room for themselves. Neither of the kings or princes seemed to notice either Oslaf or the new disturbance, and Deomaer wondered if they would. Ulestan quietly made his way to the front of the hall, where he stood a few paces behind Folcwalda. The dialogue between the kings continued, and the hall soon settled as all eyes and ears focused on them once again.</p>
	<p class="body">“In return,” Hoc continued, “we bring to you the greatest treasure in the land of the Danes.” Taking a step forward, he placed his daughter’s hand on the arm of Finn. She squeezed it gently, and Finn placed his free hand on top of hers. “It is not <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page57" aria-label="57" title="57"></span>without sorrow that our land parts with its chief source of beauty,” Hoc continued. “May you treat her well and preserve the peace that is now between us. It would not go well for an ill hand to touch a daughter of the Danes.”</p>
	<p class="body">“Nor would it go well,” Folcwalda answered sternly, “for an ill hand to touch the wife of a Frisian king.”</p>
	<p class="body">“Finn, son of Folcwalda …” Hoc began to say, turning toward the Frisian prince. But whatever he was going to say he never finished. A deep, lighthearted laugh bellowed from the old king as soon as he looked at his daughter. She had already slid under Finn’s arm and was gazing longingly at him, oblivious to the situation around them.</p>
	<p class="body">Folcwalda and Hnaef both caught Hoc’s laughter, and it soon spread throughout the hall. Though most of those present didn’t know the reason for the sudden outburst of gaiety, they were quick to join. The tension which had been building suddenly eased out of the room like a receding tide. Finn and Hildeburh both looked up and blushed, but joined in the laughter.</p>
	<p class="body">“Enough,” Folcwalda finally bellowed. “Let the feast begin. We have much to celebrate this Summer’s Day, not the least of which is the joining of Finn and Hildeburh. Let them lead the way.”</p>
	<p class="body">Finn grabbed Hildeburh’s hand tightly and almost whisked her out of the hall through a mob of Frisians and Danes who parted to make room for them and cheered them on as they went. When they stepped out of the hall, a huge roar of applause and greeting arose from the village. Those who were waiting outside joined the cheering for the prince and his bride-to-be. Hildeburh held to the prince, and he never let go of her but once for the rest of the day and night.</p>
	<p class="body">Then began the feasting all had waited for. Though the boars were still roasting, there was a great enough abundance of other fare to make men happy.</p>
	<p class="body">The hall soon began to empty, though the two kings remained. A second bench had been placed next to Folcwalda’s as a place of honor for Hoc. The two now sat side by side as if they were old friends—and maybe they were for all Deomaer knew.</p>
	<p class="body">“Why three ships and such a large warband?” Deomaer <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page58" aria-label="58" title="58"></span>heard Folcwalda ask as the jeweler tarried just a moment behind the throng.</p>
	<p class="body">“Ah, that is nothing,” Hoc replied. “It was only at the urging of Oslaf and his brothers. They thought it would be safer in the case of unforeseen events.”</p>
	<p class="body">“Unforeseen events?” Folcwalda laughed. “Since when has anything ever taken Hoc by surprise? And who would dare to attack any Danish band, no matter how small?”</p>
	<p class="body">“Yes, I know.” The Danish king sighed. “But as I grow older, I am afraid I grow more easily swayed by my thanes. Hunlaf can be very persistent. Let us not allow that to be a thorn between us. We have much else to discuss, not the least of which are the kingdoms which are gaining power in the south.”</p>
	<p class="body">“The Merovingians!” Folcwalda spat.</p>
	</main>

  </section>

</body>

</html>