<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">

<head>
  <title>The Finnsburg Encounter | Chapter II: The Gathering of the Hearthwerod</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles/stylesheet.css"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles/page_styles.css"/>
</head>

<body class="page-body">

  <section epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" aria-labelledby="chapter_title">

    <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page29" aria-label="29" title="29"></span>

    <header class="chapter-heading" id="chapter_title">

      <p class="chapter-heading_number">II</p>

      <h2 class="chapter-heading_title" aria-label="The Gathering of the Hearthwerod">
        <span aria-hidden="true">T<em>he</em> G<em>athering of the </em><span lang="ang">H<em>earthwerod</em></span></span>
      </h2>

    </header>

    <main role="main" class="body">
	<p class="body">The same day that Finn had announced his betrothal to Hildeburh had also seen the beginning of the building of a great hall in Hwitstan. Though this was but a few months earlier, Hwitstan had been a much smaller village then, smaller than many in Friesland. When Deomaer had returned from Cantwara, Hwitstan had contained only twenty or so huts scattered around a small clearing. There had been a few livestock and rabbit pens on the west side of the village, and the small stream which flowed through Hwitstan had been dammed a few hundred paces before it tumbled down the hill and into the river after which the village took its name, there forming a little pond.</p>
	<p class="body">Yet though village and clan were small, it had gained much power in Friesland. This was due entirely to the strength and wisdom of its chieftain, Folcwalda. He had succeeded in uniting nearly all of Friesland into a single kingdom. Only a few Frisian clans still preferred their independence and resisted taking a High King.</p>
	<p class="body">But Folcwalda needed to be able to gather his thanes, earls and retainers before he could fully establish a high kingship in Friesland. Those who had pledged themselves to him, and their warbands with them, needed to be in one place with their king and war leader. And before Folcwalda and Finn could gather their warbands, they required a hall large enough to house them. They needed a hearth around which the people could gather with their treasure-giver. So they had begun the building of Hwitstanburg, <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page30" aria-label="30" title="30"></span>as the great hall would be named. And much there was which had needed to be done. Some had begun at once cutting the timbers for the posts and roof, while others dug the fire pit at the center of the hall, and others worked at digging the holes for the wall’s foundation. The timbers, once cut, had to be dragged into the village over rough, hard ground. Great flat stones, some as large as shields, were needed not only for the hearth, but also to place in the ground beneath the posts to prevent them from rot ting or sinking. Those too had to be found and hauled in from the surrounding countryside. This was no small task. Yet despite the difficulties, the work had proceeded at a quick pace, and after only a few days the hall’s outline and form had already begun to become visible. In a few weeks the walls had reached higher than Folcwalda’s head. And then the smith had bound the timbers in place with iron, and the roof‍—‌the most difficult task of all‍—‌had finally been raised. When all that was done, the women did the wattle-work, weaving slender poplar branches in and out of the vertical stakes. The older children had finished the process by filling the gaps with a mud-and-grass daub which, when dried, left a hard, brick-like plaster.</p>
	<p class="body">Now, three months after it had been begun, the great hall was finally finished. And with it, atop the nearby hill, stood the new tower Finnweard which overlooked both village and bay alike: Hwitstan and Hwitstanwic.</p>
	<p class="body">When all was done, the villagers, many of whom had never traveled more than a day’s walk outside Hwitstan, were in awe of the hall’s size. It was over fifty paces long‍—‌not children’s paces but the paces of a king! Even Deomaer, who had seen the great halls at Cantbury and Oxfordshire, was impressed. The village seemed suddenly more noble.</p>
	<p class="body">Nor was the hall the only addition to Hwitstan, for as the hall had grown, so had the village. Surrounding Hwitstanburg in every direction the eye looked, changes had taken place so quickly that few besides Folcwalda and Finn had been able to note or remember them all. The village had grown rapidly as men from the surrounding villages‍—‌Ezinge, Aalsum, Beowic, Heorotburg, and even as far as Dronrip, Wieuwerd and Wijnaldum‍—‌arrived in Hwitstan. New huts had appeared and were still appearing almost daily on the outskirts of the village.</p>
	<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page31" aria-label="31" title="31"></span>
	<p class="body">Hwitstan was slowly becoming the center of a new kingdom.</p>
	<p class="body">And to Hwitstanburg, newly built, the warbands of Folcwalda and Finn had finally been gathered. Thanes brave and strong, hardy in battle and wise in counsel, came to serve the king whom they had proclaimed over Friesland and to receive treasure from his hand. And treasure they received from the first day they gathered around his hearth. Folcwalda’s hearthwerod they were. Of their mighty deeds, tales would be told and lays sung.</p>
	
	<p class="separator">•</p>
	
	<p class="body">Summer’s Day was a day of celebration among the Frisians and Danes alike‍—‌the longest day of the year, the day that the life-giving sun was at the peak of her power. The celebration marked the time of warmth and growth, when animals could graze long and grow fat preparing for the hard winter months ahead, or for the table upon which they would appear. It marked the time when the hours of daylight came in abundance giving ample opportunity to labor and provide, to rebuild and remake, and to prepare for the darker, colder season. Summer’s Day was a day of life. And for the war-tribes it was a time for battle and conquest, for raids and victories and spoils.</p>
	<p class="body">It was only fitting that the wedding of Finn, son of Folcwalda, and Hildeburh of the Danes should be on Summer’s Day. It was a new beginning, not for Finn and Hildeburh only, but for all of Friesland.</p>
	<p class="body">And for Finn it was a day of proving as well, a day whose importance could not be overlooked. For though Folcwalda had nearly established a high kingship for himself, it would not necessarily be passed to Finn. A strong prince would receive the throne from his father; a weak prince would founder if there were strong chieftains to oppose him. If Finn could indeed marry, as he had promised to his people, the daughter of a powerful Danish king, none would dare oppose him; his claim to his father’s throne would be established. If there were no queen, if the Danes did not sail to Friesland, then he would likely fall. Further, the high kingship would be dissolved.</p>
	<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page32" aria-label="32" title="32"></span>
	<p class="body">And the Danes were already late. They were to have come three days before the celebration, but no sail had yet been seen and no word had been heard. Followers of the prince as well as those who jealously eyed the throne wondered at the promises of Finn.</p>
	<p class="body">The day of celebration had dawned sunny and warm. The last of the spring rains had finally blown over, and clear blue skies prevailed. Finn’s tower had been completed only days before, and Finn had awakened long before dawn each of the past three days to take his stand atop it. For three mornings he had watched the dawn rise over the eastern hills and had waited alone for the first sign of the incoming ships. As Summer’s Day progressed, more and more people ascended the hill and waited with him, standing in groups at the bottom of the tower while Finn silently kept his vigil above them. While the older villagers stood quietly waiting, eager for the coming celebration and curious about the wonderful Danes of whom they had heard much, the children of Hwitstan, patient and solemn at first, were soon playing down by the water’s edge. The older brothers and sisters busied themselves searching for pieces of amber which had washed ashore during the recent storms, while the younger ran and played in the sand. An occasional shout of joy would erupt, and one or another child would come rushing up the hill carrying a smooth piece of sea polished amber which they would present with pride to their parents.</p>
	<p class="body">Folcwalda, meanwhile, sat in council with his thanes. Soon after the completion of Hwitstanburg, they had joined him beneath its roof. And from that day forth they were blessed by their treasure-giver. Rings crafted by Deomaer, gold and silver alike, and battle-hardy weapons as well, that generous king did give in abundance to his thanes. And land too he gave to those who served him. Folcwalda’s earls did not suffer any lack when they served their king within his hall. So as Prince Finn stood upon the tower waiting, Folcwalda’s hearthwerod was gathered beneath the roof of Hwitstanburg. The benches had been set in place, and a fire was lit upon the great hearth.</p>
	<p class="body">In all of Hwitstan only the king’s chefs and their apprentices labored still in preparation. They stood beside the roasting pits, turning the pigs on their spits and watching to see that they cooked evenly. Though some perhaps were jealous of those who <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page33" aria-label="33" title="33"></span>sat at ease enjoying the day, they nonetheless approached their task with great care‍—‌and rightly so! A tale still circulated among them of a certain Jutish chef who, by neglect, had burned a cow while roasting it and had then served the vastly overcooked meat to the king. Livestock being as precious as it was, the king was greatly displeased. He sentenced the chef to the task of replacing the cow, a task at which the chef failed. The chef’s death at the hands of that king was not at all pleasant. Folcwalda, though he was not wont to kill one of his servants, nonetheless encouraged the proliferation of that story among his cooks. He had Daelga, his poet, sing it to them at least once a year. Since Daelga had first told that tale among them, Folcwalda had not once been fed burned meat.</p>
	<p class="body">Mid-morning of Summer’s Day came and passed, and so did midday. Finn kept his vigil, and Folcwalda remained in council with his thanes. The rest of the village watched and waited impatiently. They looked ever and again at Finn, hoping he would notice their impatience and begin the celebration. But the prince’s eyes never dropped below the horizon. He stood in his familiar pose, one hand holding his staff, the other at his side, and his great sword draped across his back. His stance never faltered, nor did his watchfulness ever waver. There was no trace of doubt on his face.</p>
	<p class="body">Elsewhere upon the hill and down in the village, restless ness and impatience abounded. After a while even the older and more patient children tired of waiting and returned to the village to play games in the clearing near the great hall. Some of the men began to disperse back to their homes or farms. “In past years,” Deomaer heard someone grumble, “the celebration would have started by now.” The excitement which had been building until midday began to disappear. Many began to suspect that the Danes would not arrive that day. A few even hoped they would never arrive and that the marriage would not take place. Most, however, waited and hoped and trusted in the words of their king and prince.</p>
	<p class="body">Deomaer the jeweler was among those who believed in his prince and waited. And as he waited, his thoughts once more retraced the past few weeks.</p>
	<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page34" aria-label="34" title="34"></span>
	<p class="separator">•</p>
	
	<p class="body">The task he had been given had awed him at first. He was to mint the first Frisian coin‍—‌a coin in honor of Folcwalda. What design could he make for a coin to honor a king? He knew not. Nor was he sure of his ability to craft for Hildeburh, Finn’s future queen, gifts of the beauty and splendor which Finn desired. He also knew the physical difficulty of his work, and that he alone was responsible for the task. In Cantbury the gathering of fuel for the fires had been the job, not of the masters, but of the youngest apprentices. Deomaer had no apprentices. He would need to do it himself, he had thought. But there he had been proven wrong in his fears. Finn had seen that the task was taken care of for him, giving him freedom to concentrate only on his craft.</p>
	<p class="body">The same day that work had begun on the hall, gold, silver and wood‍—‌all three in plentiful supply‍—‌had arrived for Deomaer. There were advantages to not being an apprentice any more! Deomaer had been able to begin immediately with the forging of some gold rings. It was a good task for him to start with. It was simple enough work, and would help to bring skill back into his hands which had spent weeks sitting idle. Furthermore, rings would be of immediate use to Folcwalda, who was generous in the giving of them to his thanes. For thanes had already begun arriving in Hwitstan even then, and would come in large numbers at the completion of the hall. When Deomaer’s hands had relearned their trade through simple ring-making, he would begin his first task of real importance: the minting of a Frisian coin.</p>
	<p class="body">Yes, Deomaer had reminded himself, he was to be not only a jeweler, but a moneyer‍—‌<em>the</em> moneyer. Finn had not told him of this during their conversation upon the hill. Perhaps it had been Folcwalda’s decision, one which Finn hadn’t even known. Deomaer had felt both honored and afraid when he had been told a few days later by Folcwalda himself that he was to be his moneyer. Moneyer was a position of far greater importance than that of jeweler‍—‌though in Deomaer’s mind one less interesting, for it allowed him less creativity. Jeweling was only a trade; moneying was an office! The coin he would mint would not only be the first Frisian coin, but the only Frisian coin. He would have to <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page35" aria-label="35" title="35"></span>guarantee the constancy of the weight of all the coins he minted. Folcwalda’s rune, and perhaps even his own, would be on each coin. As trade passed through Friesland, the coin would be carried throughout the continent and across the sea, perhaps even to his old master who would no doubt recognize the work of his former apprentice.</p>
	<p class="body">Deomaer laughed at the thoughts he had had. For a time he had envisioned poets singing in the same breath of Weland the smith and Deomaer the jeweler and moneyer. He laughed again. No, he would not become famous for the minting of a coin.</p>
	<p class="body">Once Deomaer had begun his work, gold and silver had come pouring through his doors in a steady stream. And he had known that as fast as it came in, his king had expected it out again in the form of rings. He had worked long, hard hours during those first few weeks. Where the precious metals were coming from, he did not know, nor could he guess, nor had he even time to wonder. There seemed to be a limitless supply. It was arriving faster than he could use it! Five years before, when he had first left the Frisian shores and sailed to Cantbury to be apprenticed to the master jeweler there, his village had been even smaller and poorer than it was when he returned. There was neither gold nor silver in great amounts. Why, he had wondered when he left, did Folcwalda even want a jeweler at all? But as a child of thirteen summers, he was not one to oppose the wishes of his chieftain‍—‌particularly not a chieftain of Folcwalda’s might and stature! Furthermore, the winter before he had been sent away, both of his parents had died of the fever. Maybe Folcwalda had known that the two things Deomaer needed most were a change of scenery and something to keep him busy‍—‌a task to which he could devote himself. But later, when he saw the pounds of gold and silver coming through his door, it became obvious to Deomaer that Folcwalda had been acting on foresight. Folcwalda had known that there would soon be enough gold to warrant a jeweler, and he had planned for it.</p>
	<p class="body">Thinking of Folcwalda’s great wisdom and insight, Deomaer had struck upon an idea: a coin that would be worthy of a king. He had been working in the heat of his forge, sweat pouring off his brow, his hands rapidly twisting the gold into elaborate serpentine arm bands, when he had a sudden, clear picture of exactly what he wanted to do. He had at once set aside his gold <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page36" aria-label="36" title="36"></span>and tools and quickly grabbed a piece of char-blackened wood. With it, he began to draw the imagined coin on a piece of stone beside his hearth. He rushed to finish the drawing before the ideas faded from his mind. As soon as he had finished his drawing, he knew he had what he wanted. The coin he envisioned would bear the image of the great seabird riding the trade winds. It would symbolize both Folcwalda’s love of the sea and the trade routes which established his kingdom. The great bird, with its piercing, far-seeing eyes, would also serve to remind Friesland and the world of the long-sighted vision of King Folcwalda, who had united all of Friesland into a single kingdom to stand against the Merovingians; who through marriage would gain the Spear Danes as his allies; and who had had the foreknowledge to send a young clanchild, the son of his nephew, to apprentice with the master jewelers across the sea before his own kingdom even had any gold‍—‌in fact, before he even had a kingdom. King Folcwalda who had built the hall at Hwitstan which would stand until the poets sang of it. King Folcwalda, the long-sighted seabird riding the trades.</p>
	<p class="body">Deomaer had begun work on the coin at once, first carving out the mould that he would use to stamp the gold and silver, and then measuring the blanks of fixed weight. It took him many tries before he was satisfied with his mould.
</p>
</main>

  </section>

</body>

</html>