<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">

<head>
  <title>The Finnsburg Encounter | Chapter III: Of Hildeburh Daughter of Hoc</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles/stylesheet.css"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles/page_styles.css"/>
</head>

<body class="page-body">

  <section epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" aria-labelledby="chapter_title">
  <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page37" aria-label="37" title="37"></span>
  <header class="chapter-heading" id="chapter_title">
    <p class="chapter-heading_number">III</p>  
    <h2 class="chapter-heading_title" aria-label="Of Hildeburh Daughter of Hoc">
      <span aria-hidden="true">O<em>f </em>H<em>ildeburh </em>D<em>aughter of </em>H<em>oc</em></span>
    </h2>
  </header>
  
  <main role="main" class="body">
	<p class="body">As it had with the coin, inspiration for Hildeburh’s jewelry had also eventually come to Deomaer, though not without some prompting from Finn. The prince had unexpectedly appeared at the jeweler’s hut late one morning, startling him into dropping his work. The prince had looked tired, Deomaer remembered, but his expression had been eager—as if he thought that by helping Deomaer complete his work sooner he could shorten the days until the arrival of Hildeburh and the Danes. Deomaer still vividly remembered the conversation that had followed. Indeed, he remembered every word that the prince had ever spoken to him, such was his awe of Finn.</p>
	<p class="body">“Do I interrupt your work?” Finn had asked, gesturing at the tools in Deomaer’s hand.</p>
	<p class="body">Deomaer shook his head no and put them down.</p>
	<p class="body">“Then come,” Finn said. “Let us walk some distance and talk.”</p>
	<p class="body">Deomaer nodded and followed Finn out the door, leaving the hot gold ring on the stone where it had fallen and bent.</p>
	<p class="body">Finn spoke casually to him as they passed southward through the village. “You have seen where we have cleared space for a tower?” At that time Finnweard had not yet been begun.</p>
	<p class="body">“The place seems well chosen, my lord. It is not the tallest hill, but it offers the best view of Hwitstanwic and the coastline.”</p>
	<p class="body">“Indeed,” Finn replied.</p>
	<p class="body">“Your father has much foresight.”</p>
	<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page38" aria-label="38" title="38"></span>
	<p class="body">“The tower was of my own planning,” Finn said. It was a simple statement of fact and not a boast. “I have seen many towers along the Saxon and Danish shores, and each time I have thought of this hill.”</p>
	<p class="body">“With a lantern on top,” Deomaer said, “it could also act as a guide for ships.” He was thinking of the few Jutish and Saxon burgs he had seen with towers rising from the corners. They somehow seemed better equipped for defense than did Hwitstan. </p>
	<p class="body">“Whose ships?” Finn replied, narrowing his eyes a bit and focusing them on Deomaer.</p>
	<p class="body">“What?” Deomaer asked, feeling a bit uncomfortable under Finn’s scrutiny and forgetting for a second what he had just said. “Oh … Any ships, I suppose.”</p>
	<p class="body">“Yes, any ships, or any person’s ships. And when would a ship need a lantern to find the landing at Hwitstanwic?”</p>
	<p class="body">“At night … on dark nights … if they don’t know the coast well.”</p>
	<p class="body">“And who would want to land on our beaches at night?”</p>
	<p class="body"><em>Enemies! </em>The answer was obvious, so Deomaer left it unsaid. The tower had been built to help them guard Hwitstanwic, not to help others find it. Trading ships coming during the day could find Hwitstan easily and would have no need of such a light. It was Vikings and raiders who would benefit from such a lamp. The same sheltered beaches which made Friesland’s coastal villages ideal trade locations also made them easy prey for quick raids. Hwitstanwic, as the cove, beaches, and islands beside the village of Hwitstan were called, stood at the mouth of a small river which wound its way north from the nearby village of Ezinge. The cove or small bay formed a natural shelter from the rough North Sea. In addition, the Frisian coast offered another natural protection. Long rows of barrier islands lined most of Friesland. Inside this row of narrow, sandy isles the seas remained relatively mild, even in the worst of storms. Ships carrying war bands as well as trade could pass up and down the calmer inner waters with little trouble.</p>
	<p class="body">Most trade routes from the continent passed through Friesland and out to the sea along its many rivers. The Hwitstan was among the smallest of these rivers. It carried only a tiny amount of trade coming down from Ezinge and some small Frisian settlements. The Ems and Weser Rivers to the east were <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page39" aria-label="39" title="39"></span>larger and longer than the Hwitstan, and the Rhine and Meuse Rivers to the southwest were larger still. These larger rivers carried most of the trade that came from inland by ship. Would not Folcwalda have been wiser to have established his hall at one of these larger rivers? But who was Deomaer to question Folcwalda! For there were, to be sure, advantages to Hwitstanwic. Because of its natural bay, it was among the best landing sites in Friesland. Furthermore, the Hwitstan River was more centrally located than any of the larger rivers.</p>
	<p class="body">As they passed through the village, Deomaer listened while Finn explained his plans for two more towers. He planned to build them on the coast, one on each side of Hwitstanwic, far enough away to sight ships well before they reached the bay, but close enough to signal the tower at Hwitstanwic. And as he listened Deomaer began to think about Hildeburh. He had still not begun to craft anything for her though the day had drawn much closer.</p>
	<p class="body">“Tell me about Hildeburh,” he had finally mustered the courage to say.</p>
	<p class="body">Finn smiled. That smile, too, Deomaer remembered. It was filled with a joy and mirth that shone often from the prince’s face upon his people. To see Finn’s smile was to desire to serve him. “That question has been written on your face for many days,” the prince had answered. “I wondered when it would find utterance.”</p>
	<p class="body">How was Finn able to read his thoughts? A wave of embarrassment flooded over him as he thought about that, but he pursued the question anyway. “Can you tell me about her?”</p>
	<p class="body">“There is nothing I would enjoy more than speaking of Hildeburh. I think there are few who could tolerate listening to me,” the prince answered, and then was silent for a moment as the two walked on. Finally he closed his eyes and sighed. They had both stopped walking.</p>
	<p class="body">“What is Hildeburh like?” Finn had begun softly. “She is tall and graceful, thinner than her mother and sister, but somehow stronger. Her hair is long and blonde. Her smile is like the harbor on a quiet evening—peaceful and calm, both offering and providing comfort. And her anger? Her anger is like the North Sea in the winter months—fierce, wild and uncontrollable, but never <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page40" aria-label="40" title="40"></span>out of control itself and always majestic. She has fifteen years now and possesses all the wisdom of a great queen.”</p>
	<p class="body">Again Deomaer wondered how Finn knew so much about Hildeburh. Marriages of kings and princes were most often arranged for political reasons. It was not uncommon for the ceremony to begin with the bride and groom having seen each other only once, or perhaps not at all. This was more true of the larger kingdoms around them than it was of Friesland, but even among the Frisians it was very common for one chieftain to give a sister or daughter to another to seal a treaty. Yet Finn had been speaking of Hildeburh as though he had known her all his life—or all hers. Where had the prince gone, and what he had done while Deomaer was away? He had heard many allusions and rumors. Finn had often disappeared, taking with him, as was his wont, fourteen trusted warriors. He would return from places unknown laden with jewels and treasures uncountable, which he would lay as gifts at his father’s feet. From what distant king he won such gifts, Deomaer did not know. Those who did know—Finn’s thanes and companions—were those with whom Deomaer never had opportunity or reason to speak.</p>
	<p class="body">“She has never had a great love for the sea as do her kinsmen,” the prince had continued. “She prefers rather the hills and quiet rivers. She loves the evenings more than mornings, fall more than spring, and the moonlight more than the sun. Her eyes themselves are like two great moons. They can grant you peace or trouble your heart.”</p>
	<p class="body">“And which do they do for you?” Deomaer had asked.</p>
	<p class="body">“Until I am with her, they stir my heart to wakefulness. But when we finally come together, they will bring peace to my soul.”</p>
	<p class="body">Then—whether spontaneously or not Deomaer did not know—Finn had begun to sing.</p>
	<div class="stanza">
	<p class="in-chapter-poetry">“Flower of heaven, <br/>Hildeburh fair,</p>
	<p class="in-chapter-poetry">Crossing the sea <br/>In summer she came, </p>
	<p class="in-chapter-poetry">Her hair like silver <br/>Softer than fleece,</p>
	<p class="in-chapter-poetry">Her eyes like the moon <br/>On midwinter’s night.</p>
	<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page41" aria-label="41" title="41"></span>
	<p class="in-chapter-poetry">By Finn was she found <br/>Friesland’s new queen,</p>
	<p class="in-chapter-poetry">Hildeburh fair, <br/>Flower of heaven.”</p>
	</div>
	<p class="body">Finn had begun softly, but the song grew as he continued, until Deomaer stood transfixed by the beauty and power of the prince’s voice. Then Finn was silent. There was now no doubt that this was no simple marriage for the sake of gaining a treaty with the Danes.</p>
	<p class="body">In the end Deomaer had crafted what Finn wanted—a treasure worthy of the greatest of queens. A brooch he had made, a brooch not of gold but of silver, silver for a woman who loved the moon. It bore upon its surface the image of the rising moon surrounding a great bird. It was no seabird, but a majestic land bird—a bird of the night, an owl. A silver brooch with a great, white, snowy owl like those in the far north; an owl with its large eyes capable of seeing on all but the darkest nights—capable of seeing and hunting. There were arm rings to match the brooch, all silver and all bearing the moon and the owl. And a special coin just for Hildeburh. On the one side it was the same as Folcwalda’s: the seabird riding the trade winds. On the other side: the moon and the owl. The coin he set in an elaborate necklace—a coin with two sides, symbol of the union of Hildeburh with Finn, son of Folcwalda.</p>
	<p class="body">But would the union take place? He knew not. Three days they had waited for the Danes. Summer’s Day was now upon them and indeed was quickly passing. Already midday had come and gone; in fact the third hour after midday was past.</p>
	</main>
	</section>

  <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page42" aria-label="42" title="42"></span>

</body>

</html>