<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">

<head>
  <title>The Finnsburg Encounter | Chapter VI: The Winning of the Bride</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/stylesheet.css"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/page_styles.css"/>
</head>

<body class="page-body">

  <section epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" aria-labelledby="chapter_title">

    <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page67" aria-label="67" title="67"></span>

    <header class="chapter-heading" id="chapter_title">

      <p class="chapter-heading_number">VI</p>

      <h2 class="chapter-heading_title" aria-label="The Winning of the Bride">
        <span aria-hidden="true">T<em>he </em>W<em>inning of the </em>B<em>ride</em></span>
      </h2>

    </header>

    <main role="main" class="body">
	<p class="body">When the Lay of Folcwalda had been finished, it came time for the chief event of the entire celebration: the winning of the bride. A high fenced pen had been erected on the west side of Hwitstanburg, and roaming about within was a wild boar. Angry at its captivity, it charged madly at any who came too close. Though a sturdy fence separated them from the beast, mighty warriors backed away quickly from its charges. They had too often seen what damage such a creature could do, even when caged.</p>
	<p class="body">While some taunted and further angered the boar, Finn was ushered to the far side of the pen where Hunlaf the Jute, familiar with the custom, handed him a cruel hooked spear. The prince knew what was required. A large crowd had gathered to watch. While the boar was kept occupied at the other end of the enclosure, the prince climbed over the wall and entered the arena where his right to manhood would be tested.</p>
	<p class="body">To the great distress of the women of Friesland, the challenge of the boar was a traditional rite of the wedding day. A few days before a wedding a wild boar would be captured and caged. It would be fed well for a day or two, but then left hungry the morning of the wedding to increase its aggressiveness. Of course, no boar needed to be left hungry to be dangerous. They were vicious creatures by birth. A single enraged boar could wreak havoc among an entire village before being captured or killed. With one lunge their powerful necks and knife-sharp tusks could <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page68" aria-label="68" title="68"></span>rip a hole from a man’s knee all the way to his belly. No wolf pack or even a bear would fight the wild boar. It was a mighty beast, the bane of many lesser animals and of not few hunters. On more than one occasion victory had been won by a boar against a potential groom and the wedding celebration had been brought quickly and gloomily to an end. The wiser young men of the village would not drink the mead cup on their wedding day until after their encounter with the boar. Those who drank of the cup too soon did not usually fare well.</p>
	<p class="body">As Finn was a great warrior and the son of a chieftain, the village had found and captured a particularly ferocious boar. Two men had been injured caging it.</p>
	<p class="body">And now Finn was within its enclosure. Its hackles were raised as it turned to face him. Finally it had an opportunity to vent its fury, for an enemy had come within the cruel fence which encaged it. The mighty boar wasted no time. It lowered its tusks and charged with blood in its eyes—Finn’s blood.</p>
	<p class="body">Finn took a step forward, planted his feet firmly, lowered his spear, and braced himself. Seeing the spear, the boar veered at the last second and rushed past Finn, crashing into the fence behind him. Finn took a swipe as it passed and drew the first blood.</p>
	<p class="body">The boar felt the pain, and its anger increased. Circling to the far end of the pen, it charged a second time. Once again Finn leveled the spear-point at the creature’s heart. This time it did not turn away. The full force of the boar’s charge exploded into the point. The spear given him by Hunlaf proved too weak. The shaft shattered, and Finn tumbled over backwards, holding only splinters. Hildeburh shouted and started toward him, but was held back. Some thought the boar had been killed, others that Finn had been hurt by his fall. Neither was true. The prince appeared stunned, but he was uninjured. And though the spear-point had impaled itself deeply into the boar’s front leg, the beast was by no means finished. Finn rolled quickly to his feet as the boar approached him again.</p>
	<p class="body">The boar’s third approach was slower and more deliberate. Blood spilled from the wound in its leg, where the end of the spear was still protruding. Its eyes were fixed cruelly on its enemy’s belly. Finn unsheathed the great broadsword which hung on his back and lowered the point until it stood two inches from the boar’s snout. They stood for a few moments looking at <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page69" aria-label="69" title="69"></span>each other. The boar’s huge nostrils flared in and out in time with its heavy breathing. Finn’s visage was grim and determined. A sword was generally not a good weapon to use against a boar; it was too short, and there was no good way to brace it between yourself and your opponent. The boar seemed to sense Finn’s vulnerability as it lowered its head and stepped forward.</p>
	<p class="body">In the wink of an eye Finn raised his great blade a few feet and brought it down with all of his strength. The stroke went clean through the target, and the contest was over. The animal’s head rolled to the side. Its lifeblood pulsed forth in streams onto the ground. A few of the women who had already partaken of one too many cups of mead fainted. The rest of the crowd cheered.</p>
	<p class="body">Finn wiped off his blade, raised it high into the air in victory, and then resheathed it. Hildeburh was already running across the pen. She reached Finn and leapt into his arms. The crowd cheered again.</p>
	<p class="body">The cooks entered the pen and dragged the boar out behind the hall where the roasting pits were. A few seconds later, following tradition, they emerged again, carrying a boar that had been roasting all day. The cooked boar was brought to Finn as if it were the wild boar he had just killed. Finn was handed a knife, and he cut a large hunk of the meat. There were more cheers as he ripped off a huge bite with his teeth. Then, to the amusement of the onlookers, as the hot juices dripped down Finn’s chin, Hildeburh grabbed the knife from his hands and cut an equally large piece of the meat for herself. She bit into it even more savagely than Finn had. Though she didn’t know it at the time, she had just begun a new tradition in Friesland.</p>
	<p class="body">Once Finn had taken his bite, the feasting began in earnest. Three more of the roasts were carried out and set on huge wooden blocks outside the hall. From that point on, every man, woman and child ate as much as desired when desired.</p>
	<p class="body">From out of nowhere the poet Daelga suddenly appeared once more and jumped again onto the stump in the center of the clearing.</p>
	<p class="body">“Come, listen, and drink,” he proclaimed laughing as he strummed on his lyre. The commotion quieted quickly as more and more people noticed him. His reputation throughout <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page70" aria-label="70" title="70"></span>Friesland was high, and his earlier singing of Folcwalda’s Lay had raised it.</p>
	<p class="body">“Come, hear, and enjoy,” he sang louder, still strumming. A few more gathered around the stump. Those closest to him sat down.</p>
	<p class="body">“Come, open your ears, and see what enters,” he said more quietly. Then, when he had a crowd large enough for his liking, he changed the strumming on his lyre and began to sing.</p>
	<div class="stanza">
    <p class="in-chapter-poetry">“Of dragons and demons <br/>Daelga will sing;</p>
    	<p class="in-chapter-poetry">Of ents, armies, edges, <br/>Endings and death;</p>
    <p class="in-chapter-poetry">Of Saxons and Scyldings,<br/>And Spear-Danes and Jutes;</p>
    <p class="in-chapter-poetry">Of battles and beasts, <br/>Of beer, mead, and wine.</p>
    <p class="in-chapter-poetry">Now lays shall be lifted <br/>With lyre and with voice;</p>
    <p class="in-chapter-poetry">Tales will be told; <br/>Times past relived.</p>
    <p class="in-chapter-poetry">Your ears open wide <br/>These words you will hear;</p>
    <p class="in-chapter-poetry">Of princes and pride <br/>Poems will tell.</p>
    <p class="in-chapter-poetry">Of doubt, courage, duty <br/>Daelga will sing.”</p>
  </div>
	<p class="body">Without hesitation the poet once again changed his strum and immediately started into a whole series of poems and songs. He sang first of the creation of Middle-earth and of the wars between the ice giants and the gods. He followed with a song of Weland the smith, half-god and half-man; how he was imprisoned by the evil king Niphad who had him hamstrung to prevent his escape, and of how Weland gained his revenge by first killing Niphad’s two sons and then ravaging his daughter Beaduhild before flying away on man-made wings, leaving the evil king to die in anguish. He finished with the tale of how Weland finally returned to take Beaduhild for his wife and of the birth of their son, Widia the adventurer. Daelga continued with more tales of <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page71" aria-label="71" title="71"></span>Friesland and Folcwalda. Then, to the delight of the gathered Danes, he sang of the legendary Danish king Scyld Scefing and the glory of the Spear-Danes of old. Their princes did brave deeds, and far and wide many tribes paid tribute to Scyld. His son Beow was famous as well, and his glory also spread quickly. Very few, if any, left before the tale was finished. Continuing in this vein and taking only a few breaks to refill his mead cup, the poet Daelga was able to continue entertaining until long after the sun had set.</p>
	<p class="body">Finn and Hildeburh listened long enough to hear the first part of a new poem about Folcwalda, which Daelga promised to continue the following night. Then the couple danced and drank until the last red of the sun dipped below the horizon. In accordance with the tradition, Finn then swept Hildeburh up in his arms and carried her around the entire village, ending at the new home he had built for her with his own hands. “The young princeling brags of the growth of the Hwitstan,” Deomaer overheard Hunlaf saying to his brothers as Finn turned the first corner, “but he will soon be cursing these ugly new huts when Hildeburh grows heavy in his arms.”</p>
	<p class="body">“You do not know our prince,” Deomaer replied under his breath. The jeweler was right. Finn began to sing and almost ran the final stretch, with Hildeburh holding on tightly and singing with him. Then, without a word, Finn swung into the hut, pulled the skins tightly over the entrance behind him, and was not seen again for two days.</p>
	<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page72" aria-label="72" title="72"></span>
	</main>

  </section>

</body>

</html>