<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">

<head>
  <title>The Finnsburg Encounter | Chapter I: Of Finn, Son of Folcwalda</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles/stylesheet.css"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles/page_styles.css"/>
</head>

<body class="page-body">

  <section epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" aria-labelledby="chapter_title">

    <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page17" aria-label="17" title="17"></span>

    <header class="chapter-heading" id="chapter_title">

      <p class="chapter-heading_number">I</p>

      <h2 class="chapter-heading_title" aria-label="Of Finn, Son of Folcwalda">
        <span aria-hidden="true">O<em>f</em> F<em>inn, </em>S<em>on of </em>F<em>olcwalda</em></span>
      </h2>

    </header>

    <main role="main" class="body">
	<p class="body">Atop a small tower of stone overlooking the bay, as still and unmovable as the rock beneath him, stood Finn, the prince of Friesland. His unfaltering gaze scanned the far horizon for a sail upon the waters. Out across Hwitstanwic and beyond his eyes roamed, to the great North Sea from whence would come his heart’s desire. He wore a red cloak of fine woven cloth, fastened at the waist with bright blue silk and decorated at the shoulders in green. Healfwyrhta, his mighty battle sword, hung from a loose strap over his back. An old treasure it was, proven times without count. In his left hand he held his great ash staff. And on a chain about the prince’s neck was a polished ivory battle horn, new-made and not yet winded; richly decorated in silver by Deomaer the jeweler, it was a treasure worthy of a king.</p>
	<p class="body"><span class="dropcap">L</span>ong had Finn waited for this day, and with no small labor had he prepared. This was his day. Many months of hope and longing would finally come to an end. It was Summer’s Day, the day of the long sun. This was the day when Finn the strong, Folcwalda’s son, wielder of Healfwyrhta, was to wed Hildeburh the fair, the jewel of the Danes, Hnaef-sister and Hoc-daughter, whose beauty was said to surpass even that of the empresses of the Fair Folk. It was for Hildeburh that Finn now waited, standing motionless upon his tower as he had for three long days. When she arrived, there would be a celebration and feast whose equal Hwitstan would not again see for many generations of men.</p>
	<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page18" aria-label="18" title="18"></span>
	<p class="body">Before the sun had climbed halfway into the sky, the men and women of Hwitstan began to gather upon the hill overlooking Hwitstanwic to await the arrival of the Danes. Their work had been done; the preparations were complete. Never in their days had they seen such an abundance of fare as now awaited them in the village, and they were eager for it. More than a dozen wild boar had been killed and were already roasting over the fresh-dug fire pits back in the village. There would be pork for all—thanes, earls and commoners alike. Fish, too, they had in abundance; the weirs of Laguhunta and Lopystre had provided richly that spring. And of mead and beer, there was enough to quench the thirst of the entire village for a month and a day!</p>
	<p class="body">Deomaer, the jeweler and moneyer of King Folcwalda, stood among those waiting. As his eyes searched the horizon for a sight of the Danish ships, his thoughts drifted back, and he remembered the day when he had first heard of Finn’s betrothal to the Danish princess. He had only recently returned to Hwitstan from the Jutish and Saxon lands on the Isle of the Britons. The last vestiges of winter were still upon Friesland …</p>
	
	<p class="separator">•</p>
	
	<p class="body">Deomaer braced himself against the bitter chill in the air as he stepped out of his hut. The spring equinox was one week past, but the early morning still held the bite of winter. Ahead of him, a small circle of huts was beginning to emerge out of the slowly dissipating fog. There was yet no sign of life. He glanced up briefly and saw the first grey of dawn appearing in a clear sky, then turned his eyes downward, pulled his wool cloak tightly about him to protect his ears, and turned to head up the hill.</p>
	<p class="body">His hut was on the northern side of Hwitstan—the seaward side—so he had no need of crossing through the village to get to the sea. Like most of the huts in the village, his was a long, rectangular hole, three feet deep, with turf walls which rose a foot above ground and a sloping roof of timbers and skins. A heavy ox hide covered the doorway, which faced southward—away from the prevailing winter winds and into the village. Deomaer’s hut was larger than some. It had two rooms. The front one was small and simple, containing only a short mat where Deomaer <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page19" aria-label="19" title="19"></span>slept and a low table with two chairs. The back room was larger and contained the tools and devices of his trade. Deomaer was a jeweler, and soon, though he knew it not at the time, he was to be a moneyer as well.</p>
	<p class="body">Deomaer could feel the stiff breeze on his cheeks and ears as he walked around the back of his hut and started up the hill which separated village from sea. He trudged up it, keeping his head lowered to avoid the worst of the wind. A startled rabbit darted ahead a few yards, and then veered off to the right where it dove under a clump of grass. A flock of blackbirds rose from a bush to his left and flew as a group over the village and then down toward the pond. He lifted his head for a moment to watch them and then lowered it again. By the time he reached the summit there was a warm red glow filling the eastern horizon.</p>
	<p class="body">Standing atop the hill, surrounded by the first rays of the morning sun, stood a solitary silhouette. Deomaer recognized him at once; his size and stature were unmistakable. It was Finn, his prince.</p>
	<p class="body">Finn was a tall man, nearly a head taller than Deomaer; taller indeed than any in the village save only his father, King Folcwalda. He stood there still and silent, his left hand holding a sturdy ash staff and his right hanging casually at his side. His dark hair fell loosely to his shoulders, where it partially covered a long scar running across his collarbone from the base of his neck to his shoulder. From head to foot, every inch of Finn was a warrior and prince. Even through his heavy winter cloak, Deomaer could see Finn’s finely tuned shoulders and the strength in his powerful arms. His hands and forearms were like tough leather shields—shields which had held steadfast through battle after battle and bore proudly’ the marks from all. And his legs were as sturdy as a young ash. A heavy broadsword, too long to hang at his side, was slung over the prince’s back. And, though he couldn’t see them then, Deomaer knew the prince’s face as well, especially his dark green eyes. They were deep-set under a stern brow and seemed able to see right through whatever they were fixed upon. More than once Deomaer had felt that penetrating glance upon himself. It was a glance at once both fierce and compassionate. Finn was a prince whom one would be proud to serve. He was a prince for whom one would die.</p>
	<p class="body">As the jeweler stepped to the crest of the hill behind Finn, <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page20" aria-label="20" title="20"></span>his eyes moved from the back of his prince to the magnificent view spread before him. The sparkling North Sea stretched out in three directions as far as the eye could see. He involuntarily held his breath for a moment and then let out a long sigh. He had seen the great sea a thousand times before, but it still filled him with awe.</p>
	<p class="body">The lone figure tensed at the sudden sound of Deomaer’s sigh. His jaw jutted out slightly, and the grip on his staff tightened. Deomaer froze as he saw the muscles bunching up on the neck and shoulder of the prince. Finn’s battle-hardened warrior’s instincts had been aroused. In a moment of irrational fear Deomaer half-expected Finn’s staff to come swinging around into his skull, or to see the sword loosed from off his prince’s shoulders. But those things did not happen. Instead, the prince just as quickly relaxed his stance and turned to face the one who was intruding on his solitude.</p>
	<p class="body">“My lord,” Deomaer said, kneeling before Finn. He knelt not only because Finn was his prince, which was reason enough, but because he was in awe of him. Such authority did he command that had Finn been a slave and not a prince, Deomaer might still have found himself kneeling before him.</p>
	<p class="body">“Rise and stand beside me, Deomaer, son of Dunlaf,” Finn said. His voice was full and rich and laden with hidden power. But this morning it held the tone of invitation rather than of command. Deomaer rose. His awe of Finn increased his pride at the words his prince had spoken to him. “Stand beside me,” he had said.</p>
	<p class="body">“Look across the sea, Dé,” Finn began. Again Deomaer tingled with pride—Finn had addressed him with his familiar name. “To the north and west …” the prince began. Then he paused and gestured toward the sea with a broad sweep of his free arm. From the way the prince was casually addressing him, Deomaer might have thought his prince had been expecting him. Yet, he had seen a brief moment of surprise registered in Finn’s muscles a few seconds earlier when he had walked up behind him and sighed.</p>
	<p class="body">“To the north and west of us, across the Swan Road, lies the land of the Britons where the Angles and Saxons now rule. To the north and east,” he continued, adjusting his grip on his staff and pointing just north of the rising sun, “lies the land of the Danes. <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page21" aria-label="21" title="21"></span>And south of us,” he finished, turning around and looking out over Hwitstan, “is the Merovingian kingdom—the land of the Franks. And beyond the Frankish kingdoms lie all of the great kingdoms of the continent. Our land stands at the center of these like a young sapling in the midst of a great oak forest.”</p>
	<p class="body">Deomaer nodded mutely. He was trying his best to catch the import of the words spoken to him by his prince. Was Finn simply verbalizing his thoughts to the first person who happened by? Or had he wanted to speak to Deomaer in particular? Probably the former, Deomaer guessed. Nonetheless, Finn was speaking to him alone; he had used the word “our”; he had spoken of “our land”—the land of Finn and Deomaer. “Stand beside me,” he had said. He had said that to Deomaer! Deomaer was standing beside his prince talking with him—or at least listening to him. The Jutish princes and thanes in Cantbury, or anywhere in Cantwara, never spoke with the commoners.</p>
	<p class="body">Finn glanced at Deomaer for a moment to ensure that he was listening and then continued. As he did, his voice began to grow slightly louder and took on a tone of urgency, or if not of urgency, then at least of importance. “The Frisian people have always been poor—our clan not the least among them. We are few in number and have no great power. Had not the Franks been so busy fighting amongst themselves, we would certainly have come under their dominion in your father’s father’s days. And now, reunited under the kinslayer Chlotar the younger, we have the greater reason to fear them. United by such treachery, they are all the more dangerous.”</p>
	<p class="body">“We have spears …” Deomaer began to object, but Finn silenced him with a quick gesture.</p>
	<p class="body">“Spears will do nothing for us … or at least not yet. We stand now at a crossroads, Deomaer. The young sapling must grow or it will surely die. It cannot live in the shadows of the great trees forever. As I have said, we have great kingdoms on every side of us. This is a threat, yes; yet, we must remember that it is our one great advantage as well.”</p>
	<p class="body">Deomaer looked puzzled.</p>
	<p class="body">“The wealth that we have, little though it may be now, has been gained from trade,” the prince continued in answer to Deomaer’s unasked question. “The best trade routes in northern Europe pass our shores, and the amount of trade continues to <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page22" aria-label="22" title="22"></span>increase with each season. As the kingdoms around us grow, so does the trade.”</p>
	<p class="body">“Folcwalda has used this trade to great advantage,” Deomaer responded. “Have we not more wealth than ever before?”</p>
	<p class="body">“Yes,” Finn answered proudly. “He is a good king.” Between Folcwalda and his son Finn, there was none of the rivalry that so often separated a king from his princes. “He has established the beginnings of our wealth and the foundations of our kingdom. He is the first true king of our people. Never before have the Frisians been united in such as way as they are now.”</p>
	<p class="body">He paused for a moment as if to honor his father, and then continued, “Nonetheless there is still much to be done.” His voice gathered force. “Yes, there is much left to be done. We must act now. We must seize the opportunity given us.” As he said the word “seize” his right hand swung around and gripped his staff, and he lifted it into the air. A sudden energy seemed to possess the prince. He straightened to his full stature and held his staff as if it were a weapon—the staff of power of Briton’s Druid. For a moment he was a giant to Deomaer, like the great Eormenric returned from the dead. “Friesland is destined to rise and become a great kingdom …” He swung the staff high around his head. “… or to be crushed by the growing powers around it.” The staff came crashing into the ground.</p>
	<p class="body">A shiver passed through Deomaer’s spine, and he unconsciously pulled his cloak more tightly about his shoulder. Finn stood still for a moment, staring at the ground where his staff had put a small dent in the hard earth. Then he relaxed his stance, and the energy and passion which had possessed him slowly subsided to remain hidden in reserve, simmering below the surface. He began speaking once more, this time almost to himself. “We may yet become that great nation—like the Scyldings in the days of Beow—wielding such strength that others will bow down and pay tribute to us. But that day has not yet come; we have not the might to stand on our own against those who surround us. And so we must rely on trade and hope to survive. Trade has given us the wealth we have, and trade will make us stronger still. We must both protect and increase our trade. We must nurture what we have. We cannot survive great wars such as those which <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page23" aria-label="23" title="23"></span>brought low the Britons and Geats, and even the mighty Rome. Yet neither may we afford to lose this land.”</p>
	<p class="body">Deomaer nodded in agreement. He was still staring at Finn’s staff, expecting at any moment for it to burst into flames under some spell from its wielder.</p>
	<p class="body">“In times past we have had little trouble. That is true,” Finn said. “Weak though we were, and few in number, yet there were none who came against us in force. For apart from the trade which passes through our shores, our land seems barren and of little value. But do not be fooled! There are many now who envy our land and shores, for by them we control the trade routes. Hwitstan only exists because of Hwitstanwic. Without Hwitstanwic …” Finn continued, gesturing once again toward the coastlands and the sheltered beaches in front of them, “we have nothing. Because we rely on our trade, we must be able to defend our beaches and landings. I speak not merely for Hwitstan, but for all of the Frisian people—for all of Friesland. Our trade and our land are in peril.”</p>
	<p class="body">“My lord,” Deomaer objected, breaking out of his trance, “you know that your people will stand beside you in war.”</p>
	<p class="body">Finn smiled. “I know you would. Who has ever had a more loyal hearthwerod? I do not doubt the valor of my people. But we are few, and war is ugly. When I speak of enemies, I speak not only of the Franks. Though they are the closest and strongest of the surrounding kingdoms, Chlotar their king is not the only threat to our people. You have seen Cantbury in Cantwara, the land of the Jutes. You know how rich and powerful they are. And Cantbury is but one of many Jutish cities, and the Jutes are but one of many tribes and kingdoms. They are as quick to unite as they are to fight amongst themselves. You know of Ethelfrith; his burial was a tribute to his greatness. At time of need, all of the Angles from Deira to Bernicia were united under his kingship to drive the last of the Britons out of their land. And to the south of them, the Saxons have been united by Ethelbert. Where will they go—the Angles, the Saxons, and the Jutes—when they have filled the land of the Britons? They will seek new land. It is their way. Surely you have not forgotten that Friesland itself was not always the land of the Frisians. Ten and five generations have our people dwelt on these shores, and yet others there were who were <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page24" aria-label="24" title="24"></span>driven out before us. And if we are not careful, others there will be who will follow after.”</p>
	<p class="body">Deomaer had forgotten. It was before the days even of his forefathers’ forefathers when his people had settled the land. Yet who, he wondered, had been driven out before them?</p>
	<p class="body">“As I have said,” Finn continued, “we are a small kingdom in the midst of many mightier ones. So what shall we do? We must be able to defend ourselves, and yet war must be a last resort. Our hope is in trade.” Then, almost as if it were an afterthought, Finn added, “And were we the most powerful kingdom on either side of the seas, war would still remain but a last hope when all else had failed. War is always tragic no matter who the victor is.”</p>
	<p class="body"><em>War is tragic?</em> Deomaer thought to himself. <em>Is not war glorious? Or so we have bee told since the kings of old.</em> The chieftains were chieftains because they led their people in battle! What of Finn? Was he so different from the kings and chieftains of the north? Yet Deomaer himself was no warrior. What did he know of the clash of spears? “And if we must fight?” he said out loud. “If all else does fail?” It seemed to Deomaer that his prince was leading somewhere; that there was a riddle with the answer about to be revealed. What had Finn said? That they were not strong enough alone to survive a war against their neighbors, but that ‘they must still defend their shores at need if they were to protect their trade. Then the question was how.</p>
	<p class="body">“What better way to prevent war,” Finn answered, “or if war comes, what better way to win than to have a strong ally?”</p>
	<p class="body">Was this the answer to the riddle? Was Finn seeking allies? Among whom? Certainly not the Franks. Chlotar was treacherous. He could never be trusted, he who slew his own king. The Saxons? Possibly. They were kindred peoples. The Jutes as well. They would certainly be more faithful allies than the Franks. But they were far across the sea. Perhaps too far. Was Finn speaking of Rome? The emperor was even further away than the Saxon kings and had little contact with Friesland. Though once mighty, the Empire was now weak and unsteady, overrun and conquered every generation. Agiluf’s rule had lasted only twenty-five years. A treaty with the South would bring no real benefit to Finn.</p>
	<p class="body">“Of what ally are you speaking, my lord?” Deomaer finally asked.</p>
	<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page25" aria-label="25" title="25"></span>
	<p class="body">Finn answered his question with one of his own—something which in years to come Deomaer would realize was a favorite habit of his. “What ally is more sure than one which is bound by blood?”</p>
	<p class="body">“None, my lord,” Deomaer answered, bowing his head. “But where do we find such an ally?”</p>
	<p class="body">“Where indeed, my friend Dé? Where indeed!” A broad smile slowly spread across the prince’s face. “You know of the Danes.”</p>
	<p class="body">It was a comment, not a question. Certainly Deomaer knew of the Danes. They were powerful, fierce, aggressive warriors. He had seen them sail on more than one occasion during his time in Cantwara. Even the proud Saxons sung of the Danes with fear and respect:</p>
	<div class="stanza">
    <p class="in-chapter-poetry">Shields make you ready, <br/>Round, hard, and fast,</p>
    <p class="in-chapter-poetry">When ships of Spear-Danes sail to the bay! <br/>Swords boldly swing</p>
    <p class="in-chapter-poetry">Swiftly and strong <br/>For gold and our treasure</p>
    <p class="in-chapter-poetry">Must trade for our lives.</p>
	</div>
	<p class="body">For good reason the name of the Spear-Danes was well known on every side of the great North Sea. Yes, Deomaer knew of them. He nodded his answer, and Finn continued.</p>
	<p class="body">“Ten weeks from now a Danish ship will arrive in this port. That ship will be carrying Hildeburh, sister of Hnaef, son of Hoc, the king of the Danes.”</p>
	<p class="body">Was this what Finn was getting to? Did he want the Danes to come to Friesland? Few kings there were who desired to see Danish ships on their shores. “What of Hildeburh, my lord?” Deomaer asked.</p>
	<p class="body">“She is to be my wife,” the prince replied. He could no longer contain his grin. It grew as broad as his face.</p>
	<p class="body">Deomaer remained silent for a moment as he considered this news. Then an answering smile spread across his face as well. A treaty with the Danes would gain instant respect for the Frisians, if not fear of them. There were few if any who would dare attack the Danes—or, he hoped, their allies. And even more <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page26" aria-label="26" title="26"></span>importantly, the Frisians would be safe from the Spear-Danes themselves. What king would attack his own blood, particularly a sister! Finn was gaining the best treaty he possibly could with the Danes: the treaty of marriage.</p>
	<p class="body">Deomaer stared at his prince in admiration, seeking for appropriate words. The only thing he could think of was to drop to his knee again. This he did. “My lord,” he said, turning his eyes downward. Like Folcwalda his father, Finn would make a good king someday. Deomaer was glad to serve him. More than that, he was honored.</p>
	<p class="body">Finn just laughed—a deep, full laugh—and then pulled Deomaer roughly to his feet. “The work is just beginning, Deomaer, son of Dunlaf, master jeweler of Hwitstan.” His free hand came to rest lightly on Deomaer’s shoulder. “It is time to put you to the test and see if my father sent you to apprentice in Cantbury for nothing. Are your hands now as skilled as the famous jewelers of Cantbury? What have you learned in your five years across the Swan Road? Will you make my land as famous as Cantbury of Cantwara?”</p>
	<p class="body">“We shall see, my lord.” Deomaer bowed. “I am at your service.”</p>
	<p class="body">“Yes, we shall see,” Finn said. “For the next three months your new forges shall be blazing without ceasing. There will be a never-ending stream of gold and silver passing through your doors. I want rings for my thanes, wound gold for our necks, silver handles for our blades, and coins for our harbors—yes, a coin in honor of Folcwalda! And most importantly, Dé, the prize of your work, the heart of your labor, the treasure of my kingdom beside which all other treasures shall pale—I want jewels and necklaces for my wife which shall surpass all jewelry worn by any queen of the Angles, Saxons, Danes, Scyldings, Geats or any people anywhere. My queen is to be the crown of my head and the chief treasure of the Frisians. As she will be my crown, so too shall she have a crown beyond value.”</p>
	<p class="body">There was a sparkle in Finn’s eyes as he spoke of Hildeburh, and Deomaer wondered for the first time if there was more to the marriage than a convenient treaty between two kings. Why had Folcwalda—or was it Finn himself—chosen Hildeburh of the Danes? Deomaer wondered how much more was involved than simply the renown of the Danish spears. Folcwalda, it was said, <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page27" aria-label="27" title="27"></span>thought and planned far beyond what even the most astute of his thanes could comprehend. And now Finn seemed to possess that trait as well. A treaty with the Spear-Danes was certainly good news.</p>
	<p class="body">But to the young jeweler all those thoughts paled beside the fact that Finn had put his hand on his shoulder and called him by his familiar name a second time.</p>
	<p class="body">“Return now to your home, Dé, and prepare for your work,” Finn said, breaking into Deomaer’s thoughts. “Keep this secret between us for just a short time. Very soon the whole village will know the joyous news, and then we will all celebrate together—a brief celebration now and a greater one soon!”</p>
	<p class="body">The prince had confided in him. “Keep this secret between us.” He had used the word “us.” With awe and admiration for Finn, and no little pride at having been held in his confidence, Deomaer turned and walked back down toward the village. He considered stopping at the first hut he passed and waking the inhabitants to announce that Finn had spoken to him in private. No, the first dwelling belonged to Folcwalda. Better not to awaken him. Instead, Deomaer returned to his own hut where he held back what would have been a very loud shout. He would do all he could to make Finn’s name famous across the seas. Folcwalda was a good king. One day Finn would be too. Deomaer was determined to be his loyal follower.</p>
	</main>

    <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page28" aria-label="28" title="28"></span>

  </section>

</body>

</html>