<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">

<head>
  <title>The Finnsburg Encounter | Chapter V: The Lay of Folwalda</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/stylesheet.css"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/page_styles.css"/>
</head>

<body class="page-body">

  <section epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" aria-labelledby="chapter_title">

    <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page59" aria-label="59" title="59"></span>

    <header class="chapter-heading" id="chapter_title">

      <p class="chapter-heading_number">V</p>

      <h2 class="chapter-heading_title" aria-label="The Lay of Folcwalda">
        <span aria-hidden="true">T<em>he </em>L<em>ay of </em>F<em>olcwalda</em></span>
      </h2>

    </header>

    <main role="main" class="body">
	<p class="body">Deomaer turned and walked out of the hall. The sight outside was almost overwhelming. The mead was already flowing freely, and the Danes and Frisians were laughing and hugging as if they were brothers. Children ran in and out everywhere, for the most part ignored by their parents and older siblings. Most of the celebration took place in the large clearing to the north of the hall, on the seaward side of the village. Scattered about the edges of the clearing, many of the younger warriors took part in a myriad of athletic contests. There were sword fights played with mock swords of leather-covered wood, stone-throwing events, wrestling contests, and many other games of skill and strength. All this went on for some time.</p>
	<p class="body">Then once more Finn’s horn was sounded. All the village turned to look toward the hall from whence the sound had come. There beside the great ash stump stood Folcwalda’s poet. In a single, twisting leap Daelga was atop the stump, harp in hand. With eyes greener than the leaves of the ash beside him, and light curly hair that fell to his shoulders, he could have been a boy of fifteen summers. But he was ageless. His thin frame belied the strength in his wiry muscles. And his eyes, green and alive in the summer sunlight, could turn suddenly grey beside the winter hearth fire and pass through a man like the fell north wind. Two generations of kings he had served already, and a third would follow. Bard, scop, poet—whatever one would call him, he sang and men listened.</p>
	<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page60" aria-label="60" title="60"></span>
	<div class="stanza">
	<p class="in-chapter-poetry">“With strength of twelve, <br/>Of twenty, the mighty,</p>
	<p class="in-chapter-poetry">Wise Folcwalda, <br/>Friesland’s good lord.</p>
	<p class="in-chapter-poetry">To Swedeland’s shores <br/>He sailed alone,</p>
	<p class="in-chapter-poetry">The Swan Road crossed, <br/>Sea’s icy waves.</p>
	<p class="in-chapter-poetry">With courage bold <br/>There brave deeds did;</p>
	<p class="in-chapter-poetry">A prince he left, <br/>Returned a king.”</p>
	</div>
	<p class="body">So began Daelga to sing a tale of the mighty deeds of the king. “Folcwalda the Fair” this king was called—the son of Folgar, the lord of his folk, the hawk. Many brave deeds and feats did Folcwalda accomplish to win his throne, but none earned him more glory than the recapture of his father’s golden tore. This tale Daelga now told, and men and women drew near to listen. Though all but a few in Friesland had heard the tale before, yet such was Folcwalda’s fame and Daelga’s gift that they listened readily. And there were others besides, king and thanes from many kingdoms who had come to celebrate the wedding of Folcwalda’s son Finn. They would do well to hear of the wisdom and strength of the new Frisian king.</p>
	<p class="body">Folcwalda had been a young prince, not yet able to sit astride a horse, when the Swedes led by Ongintheo had come raiding along Friesland’s coast. Six and ten ships, fifteen spears each, sought the plunder of war. As swift as birds’ flight, they appeared seemingly from nowhere and were gone, and none could stand against them. Villages were burned which would not pay the ransom, and Frisian women and children were killed or taken as slaves. When the rumor of these raids reached Folgar, and the smoke from surrounding villages clouded the sky, he raised what small warband he could to stand against the Swedes. For though his clan was small he was a proud king, and he would pay no ransom. It was not many days before they came, and when they did a battle was waged. The king and his small Frisian clan fought valiantly to defend their village, but the fight was in vain. The Swedish warband was far too great. Though he stood <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page61" aria-label="61" title="61"></span>and fought until the end, Folgar was finally killed and the golden torc taken from his neck by Ongintheo himself. However, Folcwalda his son was neither killed nor taken captive. At the command of Folgar, an old and wise thane had hidden the prince in the hills. There, from his vantage atop a rocky slope, Folcwalda watched the entire battle. With the eyes of a hawk he saw all that took place, and in the hour his father fell he swore he would one day recover the tore.</p>
	<p class="body">Tall and strong grew Folcwalda, and fair to gaze upon, but grim was his mood and fiercely determined his spirit. Weak was the old thane who had saved him, barely able even to walk in his old age, but no greater warrior had ever lived in the lands of the Frisians. He taught Folcwalda well. No sooner could he hold a sword, but Folcwalda was swinging it mightily. No sooner could he hold a spear, but he was already wielding it like the veteran of many wars. Like a wild boar he was, and none could restrain him or dissuade him from his purposes. When the old thane died, Folcwalda would wait no longer. With spear, sword and shield he set out alone for the land of the Swedes, seeking to reconquer his father’s torc and avenge his father’s blood. Many were they who would have traveled with him had he asked. Sons and brothers they were of the thanes who had fallen with Folgar, and they desired vengeance upon the Swedes. But Folcwalda knew it not. For one man to attempt the seas alone was no small feat itself. But neither wild winds, nor high waves, nor the icy waters of the bight daunted him, for fate led him on. He sailed northward to the lands of the Angles. When his food gave out and his sail tore, he abandoned his ship and turned inland. He crossed the Angles’ land to the great Baltic Sea and the burg of Schleswig, where the name of his father was known among the people. They gave him a new ship and provisions for many new days, and he pressed on eastward.</p>
	<p class="body">Shelter he found in the lands of the Danes, and fast friendship was quick made with Hoc, their young king. Many promises and vows they exchanged, and they swore to uphold each other in war should Folcwalda ever become king. But despite Hoc’s words to dissuade him, Folcwalda would not stay. His voyage was soon resumed, and none of the people of the Danes thought to see him again. Yet one gift Hoc gave him at his parting, and that served him well. A proud and hard helm was forged for him in <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page62" aria-label="62" title="62"></span>the Danish smithies, and ever after, to the end of his days, Folcwalda wore that helm whenever he rode to battle.</p>
	<p class="body">Onward he traveled. Northward from the land of the Danes he sailed to the Geatish shores. A home he could have found there too had he desired, for their king was old and he looked upon Folcwalda as a son. And the Geatish people loved him as well and gladly would have had him for a prince, for he was tall and fair to look upon. Nor did they have any great love for the Swedes who had done them as great harm as they had done to Folcwalda. The Battle-Scyldings they called the Swedes, and they were bitter enemies. There in the Geatish hall of King Hrethmond, another treasure was given to Folcwalda of greater value than countless rings or jewels: an old war sword of wound steel, worn by the Geatish king in the days of his youth. Proven in battle times without count, it would not fail a steady hand. Folcwalda received it gratefully and laid his own blade aside. But he sought not a treasure-giver, nor did he desire a home. He sought only the golden torc that had been his father’s. A few days only he remained among the Geats, gathering his strength and readying for what lay ahead. Brave words he heard at his parting, and proud rings and treasure he was promised if he returned. Then the wind filled his sails once again.</p>
	<p class="body">It was no weary sailor who arrived in Swedeland, but rather a prince strengthened by his long journey and hardened by his days at sea. The determination which kindled his spirit had risen to a roaring flame. He cared not if he died in his quest, but he would live not a day longer without his father’s tore. He set helm on head and shield on arm and strode confidently to the hall of the king. Such was the fierceness in Folcwalda’s glance and the strength in his muscles, and so great his stature, that though he had never swung blade in battle he appeared to those who saw him a mighty warrior. Men fell away before him.</p>
	<p class="body">Now, the time of his arrival was early summer when the Swedish kings were gathering at their summer halls beside the sea from where they could carry on their wars and raids more easily. Ongintheo had once more gathered his warband about him and was preparing to set sail. Had Folcwalda arrived with his own warband, he would never have seen the inside of Ongintheo’s hall, for the Swedish king’s warband would have met him on the beach and a battle would have been waged there. But Ongintheo <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page63" aria-label="63" title="63"></span>sat outside his hall and, seeing Folcwalda approaching alone, thought him no threat. When the young Frisian prince placed his helm on his head, the Swedish king laughed aloud. “Does this one come alone seeking war?” he jeered.</p>
	<p class="body">But the laughter died in his throat when Folcwalda spoke. “I am Folcwalda, son of Folgar and rightful owner of the torc about your neck. Will Ongintheo, the honored king of the Battle-Scyldings, fight with me, or will he hide like a Swedish dog?”</p>
	<p class="body">Dead silence fell upon those who heard these words. Venom dripped from Folcwalda’s mouth. Long had he pondered how he might challenge Ongintheo, and he had chosen well. His words cut a deep wound and then poisoned it.</p>
	<p class="body">A look of fear crossed Ongintheo’s face. He knew nothing of Folcwalda, but could see that the boy had the strength of a giant. He had no desire to fight him. But neither was Ongintheo a coward, and strong words had been spoken. Kings did not come by their kingship easily, and many a Swedish throne had been lost because a bold thane saw a weakness in their treasure-giver. Ongintheo could not allow his thanes to see him refuse so bold a challenge. And that was Folcwalda’s only hope, for he could not face Ongintheo’s entire warband alone.</p>
	<p class="body">“Come, take the tore,” Ongintheo replied as he rose to his feet. “Cut it from my neck if you will.”</p>
	<p class="body">The words were hardly from his mouth before his sword was whirring down on Folcwalda’s head. The Frisian prince was unprepared. He was no battle-hardened warrior, and though he had been taught well he was untried. Only at the last moment did he raise his own blade to counter his enemy’s blow. Ongintheo’s blade caught his own, knocked it back, and then came down upon his head. Had Folcwalda not been wearing the Danish helm, the battle would have ended at that moment. But the helm held strong, and Ongintheo’s blow, to the astonishment of both of them, glanced off.</p>
	<p class="body">Ongintheo, seeing Folcwalda’s youth and inexperience, pressed the attack. Folcwalda staggered backward, and Ongintheo swung his sword again. Folcwalda caught the blade on his shield. He tried to raise his own blade, but had no time. Another blow and then another he took with his shield. The blade bit deeply into the hard wood. Folcwalda managed a weak <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page64" aria-label="64" title="64"></span>swipe at Ongintheo’s legs, but the Swede brushed it aside with his own sword and swung again.</p>
	<p class="body">For a long time the battle raged such. It went ill for Folcwalda, but he kept himself alive. Nor did his strength diminish, for he was in the prime of his youth, and many days at sea had taught him a stamina which Ongintheo did not understand. Still, the Frisian prince could land no blow, and his shield was battered sorely. All the time he was forced backward. With each blow landed upon him, Ongintheo’s thanes cheered.</p>
	<p class="body">Then came the fiercest blow that Folcwalda had yet felt. It rattled his bones and jarred his arm. When he looked down, his shield was no more. A look of triumph filled Ongintheo’s face. But Folcwalda as yet knew no fear, for if he could not recover his father’s torc he preferred death. He cast aside the splinters and gripped his sword with two hands. Now every blow of his enemy meant his life, for if he failed to counter just one, it would surely finish him.</p>
	<p class="body">But Ongintheo was winded. And as Folcwalda continued to frustrate the attacks against him, a brief hint of fear appeared in his enemy’s face. The prince saw that fear, and for the first time he felt hope. A blow was dealt at his head. He stopped it and returned one. Ongintheo fell backward, and suddenly Folcwalda was on the attack. He advanced and swung his blade more fiercely. The Swede blocked the blow and staggered. The prince swung again with all his might, leveling a great two-handed swing. The blades met in midair. Only one held. The Geatish work did not fail; the blade of Ongintheo shattered.</p>
	<p class="body">A look of horror crossed the Swedish king’s face. Folcwalda paused for a moment. Ongintheo’s thanes saw all and started forward to protect their king. But they knew they would not be in time. Folcwalda’s blade was too quick.</p>
	<p class="body">Yet, the Frisian warrior did not swing. For at the same moment that the Swedish king’s blade shattered, a young child stepped forward among the ring of onlookers, and the unexpected movement caught Folcwalda’s eye. So much did the child look like the king that he could not have been other than his son. A vision flashed in Folcwalda’s mind of a young Frisian prince standing atop a rocky hill watching his father die.</p>
	<p class="body">Mercy stayed his hand. He lowered his blade and stepped back. Little understanding did Ongintheo have of Folcwalda’s <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page65" aria-label="65" title="65"></span>actions, but relief and thankfulness filled his heart. That night the torc of Folgar was placed on Folcwalda’s neck by Ongintheo himself.</p>
	<p class="body">Daelga’s tale ended there after the recovery of the torc, but Folcwalda’s great feats had not. The king was known far and wide. With that act of mercy shown to the Swedish king wisdom had come to the young prince. Or perhaps wisdom had always been his and his mercy had been its first revelation. With his father’s torc about his neck, Folcwalda had returned from Swedeland to Friesland to begin an even greater work, one that would last his lifetime. He began to build a kingdom.</p>
	<p class="body">From the very first, when Folcwalda had gathered the chieftains of Friesland to be his thanes and united the villages under his rule, he had known what he was doing. It was no simple desire for power which prompted him to act. Folcwalda had understood that if the rest of the chieftains didn’t unite, Friesland could not stand against the Merovingians long. The other chieftains knew this as well, and though most were slow to act, Folcwalda was persistent and persuasive, and his arguments finally found ears. As a single kingdom, he told the chieftains, they could act as a unified force. And more important than their increased military might was the centralization of the trade customs and fees which were the source of income for most of Friesland. As a unified kingdom, the individual villages would stop competing against one another and would thus increase the profits of all the Frisian villages. At first only a few chieftains joined with Folcwalda. But each one who did added to the momentum and swayed others until there was a large following behind the future king. Those who were not easily persuaded by Folcwalda’s arguments were occasionally won by force. For among those who had early pledged themselves to Folcwalda were chieftains of the most powerful clans of Friesland. The brothers Eormen and Edmen, strong, mighty, hardheaded, and loyal, had alone persuaded many to follow a single king. Little use had those two chieftains for words. However, their swords spoke loudly.</p>
	<p class="body">Eventually all but a few villages in the more remote parts of the land had taken Folcwalda as their king. The Half-Franks, clans of mixed Frisian and Frankish blood dwelling at Wic by Dorestad on the Rhine and at Domburg at the mouth of the Meuse River, were the last <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page66" aria-label="66" title="66"></span>major clans to bow to the king. And Lyndlaf, the son of Lynd, the chieftain of the Half-Franks at Dorestad, had already promised his allegiance in secret. He had asked only that his father be left alone to rule the village until his days ended. Folcwalda needed only wait until the death of Lynd, who was already quite old, and Wic by Dorestad would be part of the kingdom.</p>
	</main>

  </section>

</body>

</html>